<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <title>Reformed Expository Commentary: 1 Peter</title>
    <link href="../styles/mywsb-dev.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body epub:type="bodymatter">
    <section epub:type="chapter">

        <h1>17. Humble Yourselves</h1>
        <p class="center" style="font-family:NuptialScript;font-size:2em;margin-bottom:2em">1 Peter 5:5–6</p>
        <p class="center" style="margin:0 3em 3em 3em"><span class="mini"> Young men, in the same way be submissive to those who are older. All of you, clothe yourselves with humility toward one another, because, “God opposes the proud but gives grace to the humble.” Humble yourselves, therefore, under God’s mighty hand, that he may lift you up in due time</span>. (1 Peter 5:5–6)</p>

        <h2>The Global Need for Humility</h2>
        <p>The pioneering missionary William Carey wrote a letter to one of his sons on the occasion of Carey’s birthday:</p>
        <p class="blockquote">I am this day 70 years old, a monument of Divine mercy and goodness, though on a review of my life I find much, very much, for which I ought to be humbled in the dust; my direct and positive sins are innumerable, my negligence in the Lord’s work has been great, I have not promoted his cause, nor sought his glory and honor as I ought. Notwithstanding all this, I am spared till now, and am still retained in his work. I trust for acceptance with Him to the blood of Christ alone.<sup>1</sup></p>
        <p>This is an astonishing statement, given the scope of Carey’s devotion and labor. He went to India in 1793 and worked without respite, with scarcely a tenth of the resources or support he needed. He hardly rested as he evangelized, taught, and translated the Bible, in whole or in part, into forty languages or dialects. How could Carey possibly fault himself for sinfulness and sloth? Did he suffer from poor self-esteem, morbid self-inspection, or the ancient battle with age and mortality?</p>
        <p>Carey’s letter seems strange today because so many people succumb to pride. Just as some physical diseases are treated but never cured, so spiritual pride is treated but never fully removed. Pride is also a malady that resists treatment. Flaws such as an explosive temper and procrastination are hard to deny because the evidence is public. But some sins are hidden, even from those who suffer them. Pride and self-righteousness are cases in point because awareness of sin is precisely what the proud lack.</p>
        <p>If someone points out a sin, the proud plead special circumstances or a misunderstanding. If a friend points out that the very refusal to admit any sin is pride, and that pride is the root of the problem, the proud protest that, too: “But I haven’t done anything wrong. Why are you picking on me? You are so critical.” The proud examine themselves and say, “Very good.”</p>
        <p>Again and again, the Scriptures tell us that God opposes the proud and brings them low, even as he exalts the humble. According to 1 Samuel 2:7–8, “The L<span class="smallcaps">ORD</span> makes poor and makes rich; he brings low and he exalts. He raises up the poor from the dust; he lifts the needy from the ash heap to make them sit with princes and inherit a seat of honor.” David agrees: “Though the L<span class="smallcaps">ORD</span> is on high, he regards the lowly, but the haughty he knows from afar” (Ps. 138:6). Job 5:11 declares that God “sets on high those who are lowly.” And Isaiah 2:11 agrees: “The lofty pride of men shall be humbled, and the L<span class="smallcaps">ORD</span> alone will be exalted in that day” (all <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>).</p>
        <p>With tiny variations, Jesus says the same thing on three separate occasions: “Everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, and he who humbles himself will be exalted” (Luke 14:11; 18:14; Matt. 23:12; cf. Matt. 18:4; Luke 1:52). Both 1 Peter 5:5 and James 4:6 quote the Septuagint of Proverbs 3:34 almost verbatim, saying, “God opposes the proud but gives grace to the humble.” Clearly, the call to humility pervades Scripture. In 1 Peter, it is the apostle’s last word on leadership and the first in his series of closing exhortations for the church.</p>

        <h2>The Need for Humility before Leaders</h2>
        <p>In 1 Peter 5:1–4, Peter told the church’s elders—its leaders—to shepherd and oversee the flock in three ways. They must serve eagerly, not for personal gain; they must serve willingly, not grudgingly; and they must not domineer, but set an example. If these are the duties of the elders, then the prime duty of the younger is to be submissive, to yield, to follow, to defer, even to obey (see chapter 8).</p>
        <p>Peter teaches that elders must lead and that young men must be submissive (1 Peter 5:1–5). But he quickly moves to the whole church: “All of you, clothe yourselves with humility toward one another, because, ‘God opposes the proud but gives grace to the humble’ ” (5:5).</p>
        <p>In 1 Peter 5:5, the <span class="smallcaps">NIV</span> says that “young men” must be submissive, but the original is simply “the younger” (see <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). A few interpreters believe that “the younger” means younger <span class="mini">leaders</span>, who should defer to older leaders, but there is no real evidence that the early church had a recognized body of younger leaders. Rather, Peter shifts from the duty of shepherd to flock to the duty of flock to shepherd. “The younger” might seem like an unusual term for the whole church. Peter does call his readers “dear friends” twice (2:11; 4:12), but he doesn’t have a favorite term of address as, for example, the epistles of James (“brothers”) and John (“beloved”) do. Further, Peter has already used “in the same way” (<span class="smallcaps">NIV</span>) or “likewise” (<span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>) to introduce reciprocal duties in 3:1, 7. So it makes sense to match the duties of “the elders” (5:1) with the duties of “the younger.”</p>
        <p>It is human nature for adults, especially “the younger,” to pick and choose what we like in the style and direction of our leaders. But we need to question ourselves. If we constantly judge our leaders, deciding what we do and don’t like, what we will and won’t heed, we aren’t truly following them. The songwriter Jeff Tweedy illustrates the point. He leads a band, Wilco, that one critic called peaceful on the outside, demented on the inside. The band plays soft ballads with jazzy chords, then scorching, cacophonous guitar licks. Laid-back country rock plays beside electric distortion that hides simple melodies. The band changes styles radically between albums and sometimes even within a song. Some suspect that they <span class="mini">aim</span>to befuddle their fans. Their song “Side with the Seeds” addresses the issue. It starts bluesy, tuneful, and slow. It picks up speed, until two guitars race to a dissonant, exhausted coda.<span>The lyrics lament that some fans of trees “side with the leaves” and some “side with the seeds.” To side with the seeds is absurd, since trees need leaves and seeds alike. People try to choose between the two sides of Wilco—the tuneful band and the experimental one. But Wilco is both, and it’s impossible to choose between them. The song’s last line says, “I’ll side with you, if you side with me.” So Tweedy asks fans to side with him and his band as a whole, not to choose between the parts that they love or hate. True loyalty goes to whole persons, in both their winsome and difficult aspects. That is true in friendship, in marriage, and in leader-follower relationships.</span></p>
        <p>Good leaders are loyal to the whole church, even the people and policies they dislike. Wise followers yield to the church and its leaders as a whole, even if certain decisions seem flawed. Jesus loves both sides of us, the beautiful and the ruined. We can do the same for each other and the church.</p>

        <h2>The Need for Humility in All Church Relationships</h2>
        <p>By chapter 5, Peter has already spoken of subjection to authorities several times (1 Peter 2:13, 18; 3:1), so he can quickly shift from his words on church leadership to the first of his closing exhortations for his church. While the younger should especially submit to their elders, everyone should be humble: “All of you, clothe yourselves with humility toward one another, because, ‘God opposes the proud but gives grace to the humble’ ” (5:5b).</p>
        <p>By definition, a church is a gathering of the humble. Disciples are confident of their worth, since we know that God created us in his image and valued us enough to send his Son for us. Yet every believer is aware of his sin and need. Every disciple has repented, and when we repent, we both confess particular sins and admit that we are selfish and rebellious to the bone. Knowing that we are incapable of self-reform, we trust in Christ to forgive and restore us. This is the conviction of every Christian.</p>
        <p>For this reason, Peter says, “God opposes the proud.” This is a global principle, often repeated in Scripture. It is a gospel principle, essential for a saving relationship with God. Yet it is vital for human relationships, too. Peter wisely leads with it as he offers his guidance for a church that needs to survive constant pressure, even persecution.</p>
        <p>It is human nature—fallen human nature—to be proud. Left to ourselves, we will be the center of our universe and our own chief concern. We trust <span>ourselves and our resources. If we succeed, we crow, “Behold what I have done.” If we falter, we rationalize, “I had no resources! What could I do?” </span></p>
        <p>Self-reliance, a sense of our merit, runs strong in humanity. Yet believers are humble in principle because we know and confess that we sin. More important, we are <span class="mini">sinful</span> and too weak to reform ourselves. Therefore, we should be humble.</p>
        <p>In Psalm 51:5, David confessed that he sinned because sin dwells deep within: “Surely I was sinful at birth, sinful from the time my mother conceived me.” After twenty-five years of daunting service to the Lord Jesus, the great apostle Paul confessed that he was still “a slave to sin” in Romans 7:14.</p>
        <p class="blockquote">For we know that the law is spiritual, but I am of the flesh, sold under sin. For I do not understand my own actions. For I do not do what I want, but I do the very thing I hate. . . . For I know that nothing good dwells in me, that is, in my flesh. For I have the desire to do what is right, but not the ability to carry it out. (Rom. 7:14–15, 18 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>)</p>
        <p>This means, first, that we deserve none of God’s favor, that his salvation is entirely gracious. We could easily keep our attention there, but we must hear the exhortation to practical humility: “All of you, clothe yourselves with humility toward one another, because, ‘God opposes the proud but gives grace to the humble’ ” (1 Peter 5:5). It is illuminating to outline the passage:</p>
        <p class="blockquote">5:5 Command: “Clothe yourselves with humility toward one another,” <br/><span style="margin-left:1.5em"/>Reason: “because God opposes the proud,” <br/><span style="margin-left:1.5em"/>Promise: “but gives grace to the humble.” <br/><span/>5:6 Command: “Humble yourselves, therefore, under God’s mighty hand,” <br/><span style="margin-left:1.5em"/>Promise: “that he may lift you up in due time.”</p>
        <p>The Christ-centered theologian might focus on 1 Peter 5:6 and the gospel. Yet at the moment, Peter uses the gospel to motivate conduct. Given the context, we realize that Peter wants believers to obey their spiritual leaders. Beyond that, Peter urges the reciprocity between all believers that lets Christian community thrive.</p>
        <p>This reminds us of Peter’s prior statement of the need for mutuality in 1 Peter 4. There, in similar language, Peter said that believers should “keep loving one another earnestly, . . . show hospitality to one another without <span>grumbling,” and “serve one another” with our God-given gifts (4:8–10 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). In 1 Peter 5, the common motif in the commands lies with motivation, not mutuality. If we remove some subordinate clauses, the interest is clear (following the <span class="smallcaps">NIV</span>):</span></p>
        <p class="blockquote">5:5 “Clothe yourselves with humility . . . because ‘God opposes the proud . . . .’ ” <br/>5:6 “Humble yourselves . . . that he may lift you up.”</p>
        <p>So Peter offers theological motives for his instruction. The command “Clothe yourselves with humility” imagines humility as a garment that believers fasten to themselves. The root of “clothe yourselves” refers to an apron that a slave or herdsman tied over his tunic to keep it clean. In Greek culture, humble-mindedness “meant an attitude expected of slaves but unworthy of free people.” Our word <span class="mini">humiliation</span> has similar emotional heft. Yet believers should wrap themselves in humility because “God opposes the proud.”</p>
        <p>God does indeed oppose the proud, as the Bible often says (Isa. 26:5; Lam. 1:5; Ezek. 17:24; Hos. 14:9). Well-known narratives show how pride operates and how pride toward God ruins relations with neighbors. For example, Cain and Abel both brought gifts to God in Genesis. Abel brought the first and best from his flocks. Cain brought whatever he pleased from his fields. When God preferred Abel’s gift of the first and the best (“fat portions”) to Cain’s featureless offering of “the fruits of the soil,” Cain took umbrage (Gen. 4:1–5). Instead of repenting, Cain stuffed himself with false rage, then murdered his innocent-but-envied brother Abel. When God confronted him, he denied everything. “Am I my brother’s keeper?” When God rebuked Cain for this, he refused to repent, and the Lord banished him, for he opposes the proud (4:6–13).</p>
        <p>Peter himself illustrates God’s grace to the humble. Before the crucifixion, Peter proudly insisted that he, unlike the other disciples, was ready to go with Jesus to prison and death. Jesus told the disciples, “This very night you will all fall away” (Matt. 26:31), but Peter boasted, “Even if all fall away on account of you, I never will. . . . Even if I have to die with you, I will never disown you” (26:33, 35; cf. Luke 22:31–33). In his pride, Peter trusted himself, wandered into temptation unprepared, and denied Jesus three times. Yet afterward, Peter wept, repented, and declared anew <span>his love for Jesus. So the Lord gave grace to him, a humbled man (Luke 22:62; John 21:15–17). </span></p>
        <p>First Peter 5:6 continues, “Humble yourselves, therefore, under God’s mighty hand, that he may lift you up in due time.” Peter does not say, “The Lord will humble you,” but “Humble yourselves.” The command “Humble yourselves” signifies that we don’t wait for God, an adversary, or the hardships of life to humble us. We must act on ourselves. Peter doesn’t specify <span class="mini">how</span> we humble ourselves, but the phrase “under God’s mighty hand” supplies a hint. The phrase “mighty hand” is common in Exodus, where God’s power delivered Israel from slavery and oppression in Egypt. God’s mighty hand defeated Pharaoh and humbled him, although he did not humble himself (Ex. 6:1; 13:3–16; Deut. 3:24; 4:34).</p>
        <p>God’s strong hand also showed itself in the ministry of Jesus—in the miracles and above all in Jesus’ saving death and resurrection (Acts 4:28–30). As with Jesus, so also with the church, suffering leads to glory. God already has power to do what he now promises, that he will lift up his people at the right time.</p>
        <p>The “due time” (1 Peter 5:6) or right time (Greek <span class="mini">kairos</span>) can be the moment that suits God’s purposes (Eph. 5:16). Or it can be the time of God’s great acts of redemption, including his return. First Peter 1:5b uses <span class="mini">time</span> in the second way. Even if we are uncertain <span class="mini">when</span> God will act, in this lifetime or later, when this age ends, he promises to restore the humble.</p>
        <p>This was an essential promise as Peter’s churches endured the threat of harm. It remains a strong promise for Jesus’ people in every nation as they face hostility. We can respond to hardships, sorrows, and delay in God’s action in one of two ways. We can grumble and accuse God, or we can trust him. Peter exhorts his readers to take the second path. “Cast all your anxiety on him because he cares for you” (1 Peter 5:7). Israel, sadly, often took the wrong path by grumbling against God. Consider the episode recounted in Exodus 17:1–7. Shortly after the Israelites crossed the Red Sea, they ran out of water when they camped at Rephidim. The people quarreled with Moses, accusing him of bringing them out of Egypt to kill them. They also tested God, demanding that he act at once, when they issued a foolish ultimatum: “Is the L<span class="smallcaps">ORD</span>among us or not?” That is hardly the voice of someone who humbly waits for God to act. Of course, we can tell the Lord about our pains and losses. But we must remember that the Lord has a mighty hand, that <span>he cares for us, and that he acts on <span class="mini">his</span> schedule. Believers wait for the Lord; they do not <span class="mini">demand</span> that he act at our word.>></span></p>

        <h2>Pride and Humility</h2>
        <p>God granted humans dignity at creation, but that dignity is threatened by internal and external forces. If we grew up in an abusive home, or if our spouses, coworkers, or friends belittle us, we might need to reassert and restore our honor. But sin and selfishness readily corrupt the proper desire for respect. We seek glory, adulation, and domination. We become proud.</p>
        <p>Peter spoke to the church in time of trial, to believers who knew the gospel. In their trial, Peter urged them to stay together and to clothe themselves with humility. The New Testament tells us to “put on” virtue several times (Rom. 13:12; Eph. 6:11–14; 1 Thess. 5:8). Peter’s term means “to tie something on”—as we tie on an apron to protect our clothes (see above). So we should wrap or drape ourselves in humility.</p>
        <p>People are prone to feel slighted when their honor is questioned. Athletic teams constantly protest: “We get no respect. We’re going to show the world . . .” Political debates constantly play upon slights, real or imagined. A U.S. senator derides an amendment to a bill. Instead of saying, “Nothing substantive changed, so it’s as bad as ever,” he says, “That’s like putting lipstick on an ostrich.” Immediately, his rival declares that his state’s ostrich farmers are offended. When people ask, “Why wasn’t I chosen, informed, called, invited?” it could be the voice of pride complaining, “But I’m an important person!”</p>
        <p>Pride can have more complex roots. A young man once told me about his battle with pride, saying something like this: “I grew up in a rough home. My parents constantly shouted and threatened. Sometimes they tried to hit us and sometimes they connected. My father was talented but addicted, so he was always losing one job, getting another, and moving on. That meant a new school, so I was an outsider. And since I was small, I was also a target for bullies. Between my parents and the bullies, I learned to give off a ‘Don’t mess with me’ aura. I acted tough and threatening, and got tattoos with knives and skulls. It became my identity. After I graduated and became a professional, the attitude seemed useful, even if I was shaking with fear. It was a facade, but I never tried to change until I met the Lord.” However <span>our lives differ from this man’s, we get the point. To preserve our honor (or pride), many of us pretend to be someone we are not. We strike poses that convey strength and confidence. We might persuade others, but it’s dangerous if we persuade ourselves. </span></p>
        <p>The gospel brings us low and lifts us up. The gospel brings us low because it leads us to confess that we are sinners. We have no hope, except in God’s sovereign mercy. It brings us low because it says that we can do nothing to redeem ourselves. We must wholly depend on Jesus, the Son of God, who died for our sins and was raised for our justification (Rom. 4:25). By his wounds we have been healed (1 Peter 2:24). The gospel exalts us because it demonstrates that the Lord sets great value on us and loves us. To come to the Lord as he is offered in the gospel is to be humbled and exalted. We become children of God, called with a purpose, and heirs of life. So let us wrap ourselves in humility. In that way we own the gospel and let it permeate our lives. As Peter says, “Humble yourselves, therefore, under God’s mighty hand, that he may lift you up in due time” (5:6).</p>
        <div class="reference">
          <hr style="margin-top:1.5em"/>
          <p class="footnote">1. Letter to Jabez Carey, in James Culross, <span class="mini">William Carey</span> (New York: A. C. Armstrong and Son, 1882), 208.</p>
        </div>

    </section>
  </body>
</html>
