<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <title>Reformed Expository Commentary: 1 Peter</title>
    <link href="../styles/mywsb-dev.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body epub:type="bodymatter">
    <section epub:type="chapter">

        <h1>4. Hope and Holiness</h1>
        <p class="h1sub">1 Peter 1:13–21</p>
        <p class="center" style="margin:0 3em 3em 3em"><span class="mini"> For you know that it was not with perishable things such as silver or gold that you were redeemed from the empty way of life handed down to you from your forefathers, but with the precious blood of Christ, a lamb without blemish or defect</span>. (1 Peter 1:18–19)</p>
        <p style="text-indent:0"><span class="dcap bgcolor">I</span>n 1588, the Spanish Armada, with 130 ships, sailed toward England, bent on depositing over fifty thousand Spanish soldiers on English soil and deposing Queen Elizabeth. But before<span/>the troops could go ashore, Spanish ships had to get past the English navy. The Spanish warships were larger and had bigger guns, but the English ships had superior commanders and greater speed and maneuverability. The Spaniards knew all this when they set sail. How, then, could they hope to succeed in battle if their guns could not attain a firing position? The Spaniards believed that God was on their side. Therefore, they <span class="mini">hoped</span>the English would expose themselves to their heavy guns. They <span class="mini">hoped</span> the English would foolishly engage them ship to ship in hand-fighting, so that the many soldiers aboard them would win the day. But as we say, “hope is not a plan.” The British kept <span>their distance and shot the Spanish ships to pieces. The Spanish paid dearly for a vain hope. </span></p>
        <p>Misplaced hope is worthless, but well-founded hope is potent. First Peter 1:13–21 begins and ends with such hope. Peter first commands his readers to “set your <span class="mini">hope</span> fully on the grace to be given you when Jesus Christ is revealed” (1:13). As he closes, he tells his people that Christ, the Lamb of God, ransomed them from a futile life. “Through him you believe in God, who raised him from the dead and glorified him, and so your faith and <span class="mini">hope</span> are in God” (1:21).</p>

        <h2>Hope Leads to Holiness</h2>
        <p>Between verses 13 and 21, Peter describes what happens when we hope in the grace of Jesus. We no longer conform to evil desires (1 Peter 1:14). We exercise self-control rather than indulging every urge. Further, because “he who called you is holy,” we are holy (1:15). That leads to God’s central command: “Be holy, because I am holy” (1:16, quoting Lev. 11:44–45; 19:2).</p>
        <p>Over the next verses, Peter explains <span class="mini">why</span> believers should be holy. First, God “judges each man’s work impartially” (1 Peter 1:17), so that we will have to render an account for everything we say (Matt. 12:37), everything we do (2 Cor. 5:10), and our use of every gift (Matt. 25:14–30; Luke 12:13–21). Second, the Father redeemed us from our empty life at great cost—by Christ’s precious blood (1 Peter 1:18–19). If he ransomed us from a vain life, how can we return to it?</p>
        <p>In this call to gospel-driven holiness, Peter harvests his prior themes to enhance his point. For example, Peter addressed his epistle to “God’s elect, strangers in the world” (1 Peter 1:1). Now he says that we should live “as strangers” (1:17), since our holiness will set us apart from the practices of this age. Peter also said that we have a sure and “living hope” that we will gain an imperishable inheritance, guaranteed by Jesus’ resurrection and “kept in heaven” (1:3–4). We await “praise, glory and honor when Jesus Christ is revealed” (1:7). Because we have salvation by grace (1:9–10), we can and should put our hope in Christ (1:13).</p>
        <p>Now Peter recapitulates his first themes. In 1 Peter 1:13–21, he exhorts his people to live out their hope of redemption. In 1:3, Peter says that we have been born again to a living hope; in 1:21, he says that “your faith and <span>hope are in God.” But in 1:13, he commands, “Set your hope fully on the grace to be given you when Jesus Christ is revealed.” We see the indicative-imperative pattern once more. Because we <span class="mini">have a hope</span>that relies on God, we should <span class="mini">set our hope</span> on him.</span></p>
        <p>This section of 1 Peter has two parts. A series of imperatives state the ethical implications of the life of hope in 1:13–17. Then in 1:18–21, Peter returns to his celebration of the work of God that gives us hope.</p>
        <p>Peter commands us to “set your hope fully on the grace to be given you when Jesus Christ is revealed” (1 Peter 1:13). Peter surrounds his central message with subordinate commands that develop the meaning of hope. Translated literally, 1 Peter 1:13 reads, “Girding the loins of your mind, being completely self-controlled, hope on . . . Jesus Christ.” The <span class="smallcaps">NIV</span> sensibly translates “girding the loins of your mind” as “prepare your minds for action.” For the whole of biblical history, most people wore loose robes that worked well for ordinary activities, but inhibited strenuous labor, fighting, and running. To gird the loins is to wrap up flowing garments to gain freedom to work hard or run. Our parallel phrase is: “Roll up your sleeves.”</p>
        <p>God told the Israelites to eat the Passover with loins girded and sandals on their feet, so that they would be ready to flee Egypt at any moment (Ex. 12:11). Jesus alludes to this in Luke 12:35, when he tells his disciples, “Stay dressed for action” (<span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). When Peter states that our <span class="mini">minds</span> must be ready, he doesn’t mean the intellect in a narrow sense. The word translated “mind” (<span class="mini">dianoia</span>) means the understanding with its dispositions and plans. When Jesus tells us to love the Lord our God with all our heart, soul, and mind, he means that we should love God with the whole person, with all our faculties (Matt. 22:37).</p>
        <p>The next command, “be self-controlled” (1 Peter 1:13), develops the concept of preparation. The word (<span class="mini">nephō</span>) usually means to be sober, balanced, or self-controlled.<sup>1</sup> Peter wants us to be realistic and clear-minded. The opposite of sobriety is drunkenness, folly, and lack of self-discipline, whether due to wine, anger, fear, or greed. Peter wants us to focus our full attention on Jesus, through whom God gives his grace.</p>
        <p>His emphasis falls not on the subjective <span class="mini">feeling</span>of hope, nor on the intensity of our hope, but on the <span class="mini">object and direction</span> of our hope. Christians <span>should hope in the grace of Christ to be revealed. <span class="mini">Hope</span> is the principal verb in 1 Peter 1:13 and the programmatic command for the passage.<sup>2</sup> The subsequent commands, to be holy and to conduct ourselves with fear of God, follow from it.>></span></p>
        <p>Specifically, we rest our hope on the grace that God will give “when Jesus Christ is revealed,” that is, on the day he returns. Traditionally, we focus on the grace revealed in Jesus’ life, death, and resurrection, and rightly so, since Jesus’ completion of the plan of redemption brings us peace with God. Nonetheless, Peter here says that the grace to come decisively affects the present. Our hope in the grace to be revealed prepares us for self-discipline and action today.</p>
        <p>Consider, for example, a student as she toils to complete her master’s thesis in education. If she is a part-time teacher’s aide and part-time barista, she might find it difficult to motivate herself to complete the project if she constantly thinks, “What’s the point of this? I can’t even get a teaching job now. When I finish my degree, it will be even harder to get a job because I’ll fall into a higher pay bracket.” But if the student has been teaching at a fine school for ten years and knows that she will get a raise and leadership responsibilities as soon as she finishes, she has every reason to pour herself into her studies. Similarly, the promised return of Jesus motivates us to faithfulness now, since we know our labor is not in vain (1 Cor. 15:58).</p>
        <p>Most of Peter’s spiritual children began life as pagans who bowed to gods who possessed greater power, but not greater virtue, than humans. The popular religions of the day, especially polytheism and emperor worship, demanded loyalty and little more. The leading philosophical or ethical systems, Stoicism and Epicureanism, aimed (respectively) to minimize pain and to realize sustainable pleasures.<sup>3</sup>Therefore, Peter asserts, “As obedient children, do not be conformed to the passions of your former ignorance” (1 Peter 1:14 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). This almost sounds insulting, but it’s an honest description<span>of their former life. They were ignorant of God and his standards. According to their myths, their “gods” followed their passions, so the people did the same. ></span></p>
        <p>If this sounds judgmental, let’s recall that the same Lord who said, “Do not judge, or you too will be judged” (Matt. 7:1), also said, “Do not judge by appearances, but judge with right judgment” (John 7:24 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). Clearly, it is no sin to state the facts about the moral bankruptcy of pagan polytheism. It is a sin to condemn the innocent and to judge with haste, or to play the hypocrite by condemning others for committing sins we indulge. But it is good for Peter to speak against the pagan ways that his first readers once followed.</p>
        <p>But now Peter’s people are “obedient children,” so it is their nature<b>—</b>and ours—to obey. It is normal for God’s family to obey the Father and to walk in the way marked by his character and law. Therefore, Peter exhorts, “do not be conformed to the passions of your former ignorance” (1:14 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). The command “do not be conformed” is a present passive imperative. The present tense suggests that Peter continually and permanently forbids indulgence of ignorant passions. Peter chose the passive voice for the command because he knows that we are, to some extent, passive in the presence of forces that press us to conform to them. Whatever is customary seems normal, and whatever is normal seems right. But we must resist the pressure to conform to the age. We resist evil desires that we once indulged. We turn from sinful acts that are so common in the culture and in the lifestyle of many who grew up outside the covenant.</p>
        <p>In some ways, all evil desires are similar. All seek to deify man and all violate God’s law. Yet the specific forms of evil vary from one time and place to another. Today, Americans typically live together for a season before marriage. We wear clothing that flaunts our wealth or sexuality, and we indulge the material desires that our income allows us to purchase. Since we behave essentially the way others in our social group behave (and since there is always someone who is worse), we are nearly blind to our errors. It is easy to yield to our desires.</p>
        <p>Peter recognizes that a convert will still <span class="mini">feel</span>passions, but he knows that disciples also resist them, for two reasons. First, he states, “just as he who called you is holy, so be holy in all you do” (1 Peter 1:15). Second, we must resist because “you were ransomed from the futile ways <span>inherited from your forefathers” (1:18 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). Consider the summons to holiness and the obstacles to holiness first.>></span></p>

        <h2>Obstacles to Holiness</h2>
        <p>Peter describes two obstacles to holiness. His people conformed themselves to their passions, and they followed the futile way of life inherited from their ancestors (1 Peter 1:14). As a counter, they must set their hope on Christ and remember their identity as obedient children of the holy God.</p>
        <p>Peter teaches that God’s children should take on his traits. Jesus teaches that we should be <span class="mini">perfect</span> as our Father in heaven is perfect (Matt. 5:48). Paul declares, “Be imitators of God, therefore, as dearly loved children” (Eph. 5:1; see also 1 Thess. 1:6). We should “live a life of love, just as Christ loved us and gave himself up for us” (Eph. 5:2). The Bible sometimes exhorts believers to imitate other believers (e.g., 1 Thess. 2:14), but imitation of even the finest people is fraught with the danger that we will adopt their flaws as well as their virtues. Yet we can always imitate God, for he is holy. As Peter says, “Just as he who called you is holy, so be holy in all you do; for it is written: ‘Be holy, because I am holy’ ” (1 Peter 1:15–16). The holiness of God is a fundamental tenet of Scripture. The Pentateuch often repeats, “Be holy, for I am holy” (Lev. 11:44; 19:2; 20:7, 26; cf. Isa. 6:3; 1 Thess. 4:7).</p>
        <p>Biblical holiness entails a person’s righteousness, justice, and separation from sin. If a man is holy, he is set apart <span class="mini">from</span> this world, <span class="mini">for</span> God. Later, Peter will insist that holiness manifest itself in positive actions by masters, servants, husbands, and wives (1 Peter 2:18–3:17). That can lead to social disruption and trouble for the person who is holy (4:1–4). We are strongest when we know how to separate from worldliness while staying engaged with the world.</p>

        <h2>Obstacles to Holiness Illustrated by the Crusades</h2>
        <p>It is easier to stay holy if we withdraw from society, but when we engage the world our hands can get dirty. If we dig into the process of social reform, it is too easy to adopt the culture’s perspectives and methods. To explore this, I want to consider the Crusades as a cautionary tale about engagement with the world.</p>
        <p>The Crusades had several origins. When they began, North African Muslims had held most of Spain for centuries and threatened southern France. Turkish Muslims had slaughtered their way to the gates of Constantinople, the capital of a Christian realm. They reportedly butchered men, raped women, and defiled sanctuaries as they went, and they threatened central Europe up to Austria. Muslims sometimes persecuted and humiliated Christian pilgrims who traveled to Jerusalem, after having granted them safe passage for centuries. From this perspective, the Crusades <span class="mini">could</span> be construed, in part, as wars of self-defense or counterattack against an invader who had taken lands. The distinction is that the war was not nationalistic, but aimed at protecting Christian lands and peoples, wherever they lived. (Certain scholars argue that Muslim leaders of the time saw the Crusades as fairly normal wars.<sup>4</sup>) The Crusades had at least one positive trait—Christians’ willingness to risk their lives to assist fellow believers. So the Crusades represent an effort to engage the world.</p>
        <p>Unfortunately, the Crusades went wrong in almost every way. Historically, we think first of terrible, often indiscriminate, violence done in the name of Christ. There were also theological errors. Christian leaders inspired and supported the Crusades by mixing Christian ideas with errors—meritorious pilgrimages, indulgences, penance, and the notion that self-imposed punishments could satisfy the punishments that God might inflict on sinners in this life or in purgatory.<sup>5</sup>They also drew on completely secular concepts: the centrality of land, the blood-feud. More broadly, the Crusades accepted a militarized perspective on life: “Europe had become . . . an armed camp,” and the pope, in his promotion of the Crusades, leveraged that concept rather than questioning it.<sup>6</sup></p>
        <p>Between the collapse of Rome in <span class="smallcaps">A.D.</span>476 and the rise of the high Middle Ages, Europe endured centuries of violence and chaos. Rulers were essentially warlords whose strength legitimated their rule. Warriors felt deep loyalty to their lords as kings, popes, and barons struggled for supremacy. Clan and <span>honor were paramount, and offenses against them had to be avenged. In the eleventh century, a reform movement arose in the church. Some wanted to repristinate the church, others to liberate it from the domination of local lords. In that process, popes sought knights of Christ to defend the church against lords who tried to control it. Knights were professional warriors. Because church reform had spiritual effects, the knightly class become concerned for their souls, as they realized that there was a conflict between the gospel and their profession as warriors who often fought fellow Christians in neighboring areas. They learned to ask whether they could do penance to cover their sins. Might their work condemn them eternally? Pope Urban had an answer, as we will see.<sup>7</sup> </span></p>
        <p>The desire to defend Christian lands, along with a desire to avenge affronts to the honor of Christians, combined explosively with the concerns of Christian knights when, at Clermont in November 1095, Pope Urban II preached a sermon that some call the most influential speech in history. Hundreds of bishops, abbots, noblemen, and warriors heard Urban that day (and he delivered it again in many other settings). He knew his audience well and readily appealed to its faith, outrage, and warrior spirit.</p>
        <p>Five summaries of the speech have survived.<sup>8</sup>All agree on its principal themes, although the specific language differs. Each account agrees that Urban called for Christian knights to stop fighting each other. Instead, they should battle infidels who devastated Christian lands with fire and sword. In Robert the Monk’s version, Urban called the knights to liberate Christians, especially in Constantinople, and to avenge the pillage, fire, rape, and torture (described in lurid detail) wrought by “an accursed race,” and to free Jerusalem, including the most holy relic, the Holy Sepulchre, from their control.<sup>9</sup></p>
        <p> In Balderic of Dol’s account, Urban appeals to knights of Christ, who should “have compassion” for their “brothers” in the east. “You should shudder . . . at raising a violent hand against Christians; it is less wicked to brandish your sword against Saracens. It is the only warfare that is righteous, for it is charity to risk your life for your brothers.”<sup>10</sup></p>
        <p>Urban linked the campaign to liberate Jerusalem to the most popular form of penance, the “holy pilgrimage” in which travelers become holy sacrifices.<sup>11</sup> The knights wanted to do penance, and Urban gave “whoever wishes to save his soul” an opportunity to do so.<sup>12</sup> He told the warriors that “remission of sins will be granted” to all who go to struggle “against the heathens.”<sup>13</sup> And they will taste “imperishable glory in the kingdom of heaven.”<sup>14</sup> Urban’s “Letter of Instruction to the Crusaders, December, 1095,” also offers “the remission of all their sins.”<sup>15</sup> The knights were, in essence, <span class="mini">armed pilgrims</span>. For separate reasons, the concept of a soldier as a knight of the church was familiar, although the notion of armed pilgrims <span class="mini">was</span> new.</p>
        <p>Urban also tied the cause to a popular form of spirituality, monasticism. Crusaders took monastic vows so that, in theory, the forces were armed, mobile monasteries. He also appealed to offended honor. Since their Christian brothers suffer and their lands are taken, the knights should, like Christ, be willing to suffer to regain their lands and the church’s holy sites. In short, every theme of Urban’s speech resonated with his listeners: pilgrimage, honor, vengeance, land, brotherhood, monasticism, knighthood, and remission of sin. Urban’s speech had unprecedented effect because it combined familiar themes in a new way—and had an initially successful result.</p>
        <p>Urban claimed that warriors were “knights of Christ” who went in the way of the Lord by fighting evil. If the knights loved their souls, they should fight the barbarians who had slain their brothers. And if they perished, they died as martyrs and gained “everlasting glory.”<sup>16</sup> Thus, warfare was viewed as a redemptive work.</p>
        <p>At a distance, the errors are obvious. But Urban drew on noble and almost undisputed themes. The cultural milieu made his appeal plausible. His arguments were so well suited to the perceived needs of the hour that almost every major Christian leader of the age endorsed the Crusades: Bernard of Clairvaux, Thomas Aquinas, St. Francis of Assisi, Catherine of Siena, and more. Why did the great Christians of the day so fervently support the Crusades that they sacrificed wealth, health, even life itself in a cause that they believed to be so just?<sup>17</sup> First, there was a sliver of justice in their cause. It <span class="mini">is</span> right to defend one’s people and to protect the defenseless. After that, we see them legitimating themes from their culture that have no place in God’s economy. Three errors are especially prominent: the desire to avenge affronts to honor, the belief that one can advance the cause of Christ through physical warfare, and the belief that one can perform deeds or do penance to gain the remission of sins and eternal life. Historians see that once the Crusades began, Christian warriors almost immediately adopted the worst tactics of their adversaries (as so often happens in war).</p>
        <p>The goal here is not to denigrate Christians past. I have tried to frame my account so that we feel the force of Urban’s plea, even if we are convinced that he was disastrously wrong. The goal is to beware lest we do the same thing. It is so easy to baptize the standards of our day: First, we accept an idea because almost everyone else in the culture does. Second, we find some link between Scripture and that cultural conviction. Third, we fail to see how valid biblical teaching or doctrine corrects the error.</p>
        <p>For the Crusades, first, warfare, honor, vengeance, and meritorious deeds were in the air. Second, there is teaching on justice, love of Christian brothers, and spiritual warfare in Scripture. All three were weaponized, by assimilation to the themes above. Third, the church failed to see that salvation rests on the completed work of Jesus, received by faith alone. The church taught that exceptional deeds either opened the gate to heaven or shortened the time in purgatory. Pilgrimages to places such as Jerusalem were already seen as aids to salvation. That made it easy to justify the Crusades as pilgrimages. It is easy to conform to the age and so to be of the world rather than being in the world but not of it. It is easy to engage the world and capitulate to it instead of separating from it. Peter stresses the need to be holy and separate (1 Peter 1:15–16).</p>

        <h2>The Accountability of the Redeemed</h2>
        <p>Peter states three reasons why believers should be holy. First, we should be holy because the God who called us is holy (1 Peter 1:15–16). God will remake us in his image, in the likeness of the Son (Rom. 8:29; Phil. 3:21; 1 John 3:2). We should therefore be holy because it is both our obligation and our future to conform to God’s character. As we see his glory, we become like him (2 Cor. 3:18).</p>
        <p>Second, Peter notes that his people should be holy for this reason: “Since you call on a Father who judges each man’s work impartially, live your lives as strangers here in reverent fear” (1 Peter 1:17). Peter here combines two concepts that we needlessly separate: God is both Father and Judge. It is a great privilege to call God <span class="mini">Father</span> (Matt. 6:9; Luke 11:2; Rom. 8:15). But this intimate relation hardly exempts us from obedience. On the contrary, Peter declares (to quote the <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span> translation of 1:17), you must “conduct yourselves with fear throughout the time of your exile.” That is, while we live as strangers in this world, we both think of God with familial love, as Father, <span class="mini">and</span> retain an awe of the mighty and holy Lord. C. E. B. Cranfield observes:</p>
        <p class="blockquote">It is of God’s infinite condescension that you are allowed to call him “Father.” You are not to presume on his goodness, but rather let it make you reverent and humble. He has not ceased to be the impartial Judge of all men. The more truly, the more intimately, we know him, the more of awe and reverence we shall feel.<sup>18</sup></p>
        <p>The fear of the Lord, including fear of his justice, is the beginning of wisdom (Prov. 1:7; Matt. 10:28; Heb. 4:1). Since human fathers also judge their children, this joining of intimacy and justice should not surprise us. Indeed, just as human children both respect and obey the parents who love them, so those who call God <span class="mini">Father</span>should love and obey him. If we seek his benefits, if we invoke him as Father, we should act like his children and meet his standards for the family.<sup>19</sup></p>
        <p> This leads to a third reason for holiness. God the Father also “judges each man’s work impartially” (1 Peter 1:17). He neither looks at appearances nor plays favorites. He judges our deeds, and nothing is hidden from him. Jesus states that “he will reward each person according to what he has done” (Matt. 16:27). Paul agrees: “For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that each one may receive what is due him for the things done while in the body, whether good or bad” (2 Cor. 5:10; cf. Jer. 17:10; Matt. 12:37; Rev. 20:12). This in no way nullifies justification by faith. But God will judge and Jesus will be proved right when he says, “You will recognize them by their fruits” (Matt. 7:16, 20 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). This is not salvation by works. It reflects the great principle that our works follow our heart commitments so that genuine faith will show itself in words and deeds. In Psalm 62, David says that the L<span class="smallcaps">ORD</span> is his rock and salvation and that he “will reward each person according to what he has done” (Ps. 62:12). Because David trusts the Lord, he knows his works will reflect that. God will see them and be pleased.</p>
        <p>For this reason, Peter says, “conduct yourselves”—create a way of life<sup>20</sup>—marked by reverent fear of God “throughout the time of your exile” (1 Peter 1:17 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>; the <span class="smallcaps">NIV</span> uses “live . . . as strangers”). The term <span class="mini">exile</span> is <span class="mini">paroikia</span>. There are two Greek words for the idea of settling in a place. One is <span class="mini">katoikia</span>, which signifies settling down. The other, which Peter uses here, is <span class="mini">paroikia</span>. It means “to settle temporarily.” Since we are sojourners, resident aliens, in this world, we never fully settle or perfectly fit here. We should neither expect nor attempt to do so.</p>
        <p>Two of our children have spent time abroad in college. One lived in France. Her French was good enough that the French did not recognize her as an American, but they still knew she wasn’t French. Another knew enough Mandarin to negotiate the streets of provincial Chinese cities, but no one thought she was Chinese. Neither fully belonged. They were resident aliens, and so are we.</p>
        <p>Genesis calls Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob “aliens” (Gen. 17:8; 19:9; 28:4). Abraham and his family “admitted that they were aliens and strangers on earth” (Heb. 11:13). They “lived in tents” with no land of their own (Heb. 11:9). The Israelites were also strangers in Egypt. They lived there for centuries, but never fully belonged (Ex. 22:21; 23:9). Indeed, despite his power and wealth, even King David proclaims, “We are aliens and strangers in your sight, as were all our <span>forefathers. Our days on earth are like a shadow” (1 Chron. 29:15). If even David, the king of Israel, could call himself an alien, every believer must be an outsider in his or her age. Instead of trying to fit our times, we should look “forward to the city with foundations, whose architect and builder is God” (Heb. 11:10). </span></p>
        <p>We should see our life the same way, especially if we fit rather well into our culture. It seems that there is always a crisis in morals, politics, or the economy that can remind us, if we are perceptive, that this world, in its present form, cannot be our final home. Americans and others from the dominant West must recognize this. If we believe we are mighty, let history teach us that mighty nations dwindle away. Alexander the Great led his Greek and Macedonian armies to world domination. Today, Greece and Macedonia are feeble Mediterranean states. The Mongols, once the terror of Asia and Europe, now inhabit a poor and barren land. Every empire falters and falls. If we admire our democracy and dynamism, our energy and invention, let us remember that we are strangers in this fallen world.</p>
        <p>In fact, most of us are double-minded, conflicted, when we evaluate our culture. We lionize and demonize, sometimes in the same conversation. If there is much to praise, there is also, in every culture, much to blame. At this moment, late in 2014, orthodox Christians lament the West’s steady march toward family chaos, as serial cohabitation, easy divorce, and sexual license stretch, apparently irresistibly, toward same-sex marriage, polygamy, and polyamory. In years past, racism and abortion stirred our passion. Within a few years, a new moral failing will seize our attention. But we have a hard time seeing other cultural problems. We seem almost blind to the materialism and individualism that afflict our culture.</p>
        <p>If this world in its present form is not our home, let us keep a loose grip on its benefits and a gimlet eye on its ideologies. Let us live to please our Father and stay ready to engage the times, maintaining a certain distance from our culture.</p>
        <p>We have said that there are several reasons for a believer to be holy. First, the God who called us is holy. Second, God the Father is still God the Judge. Third, because we never fully belong in this world, we should live by God’s standards. Finally, we should be holy because Jesus came to redeem us from an empty life inherited from our forefathers:</p>
        <p class="blockquote"> For you know that it was not with perishable things such as silver or gold that you were redeemed from the empty way of life handed down to you <span>from your forefathers, but with the precious blood of Christ, a lamb without blemish or defect. (1 Peter 1:18–19) </span></p>
        <p>Today, <span class="mini">redeem</span> is an essentially religious term, but in Peter’s day it was a commercial term for the liberation of a slave or a war-captive by the payment of a price for purchase or ransom. This implies, first, that our sin has reduced us to the status of slaves or captives. Second, we cannot extricate or liberate ourselves from this predicament. A Christian friend who is a professional tennis coach illustrated slavery this way: A self-taught player picks up certain bad habits and flaws in technique. A gifted athlete can make a flawed stroke work, but in the process the flaw becomes an ingrained pattern. As a result, the player is in bondage to his flaw and cannot deliver himself from it. We need someone—Jesus—to intervene in order to secure our release from the power and consequences of sin. The consequences are guilt, condemnation, and physical and eternal death.</p>
        <p>With any ransom, a price is paid. This payment is not monetary, “not with . . . silver or gold” (1 Peter 1:18). Rather, Jesus, God’s spotless Lamb, gave his “precious blood” as he suffered the death that our sins deserve (1:19). As a result, whatever our circumstances, believers are never spiritual slaves.</p>
        <p>According to 1 Peter 1:18–19, Jesus <span class="mini">ransomed</span> us (Greek <span class="mini">lutroō</span>). Using a slightly different image, Paul says that Jesus <span class="mini">obtained</span> or <span class="mini">acquired</span> us (Acts 20:28; Greek <span class="mini">peripoieō</span>). Paul also teaches that Jesus <span class="mini">bought</span> us at a price (1 Cor. 6:20; Greek <span class="mini">agorazō</span>). We are free and must live accordingly. “You were bought at a price; do not become slaves of men” (1 Cor. 7:23). Therefore, a disciple must especially shun sins that have the capacity to enslave or addict, whether drugs, alcohol, nicotine, pornography, or even anger. Of course, that is easier said than done. For that reason we should be watchful, and seek aid when we feel trapped. Yet as the metaphor suggests, the believer is not absolutely free. We belong to the Lord, who liberated us from a malign master and placed us in his household, where we offer him our service.</p>

        <h2>The Call to Hope in Christ</h2>
        <p>Peter assures his people that their status as redeemed children is neither an accident nor an afterthought. Human rebellion did not surprise God. The prophets foretold Jesus’ life, betrayal, and sacrifice. Jesus also predicted it, <span>but even more, he said that it happened according to the plan that predates all history. Jesus said that he <span class="mini">had to be</span>“delivered into the hands of sinful men, be crucified and on the third day be raised again . . . and then enter his glory” (Luke 24:7, 26). John calls Jesus “the Lamb that was slain from the [foundation] of the world” (Rev. 13:8). Paul explains that this was God’s will, plan, and good pleasure, put into effect at the right time (Eph. 1:9–11). Joining that train of biblical theology, Peter states that God foresaw and predestined the redemptive work of Jesus, for Jesus “was chosen [by God] before the creation [or <span class="mini">foundation</span>] of the world” (1 Peter 1:20a). Then God accomplished his eternal plan, so it “was revealed in these last times for your sake” (1:20b). These are the last times, the times of Christ, when we await one last element of God’s plan, the return of Christ. All of this, Peter says, is “for your sake.”</span></p>
        <p>We must apply “the precious blood of Christ” to ourselves, which we do when we put our “faith and hope” in God (1 Peter 1:19, 21). Hebrews teaches, “Just as man is destined to die once, and after that to face judgment, so Christ was sacrificed once to take away the sins of many people” (Heb. 9:27–28). Judas presents the clearest case of the man who rejects the One through whom we can face judgment without fear. Because Judas rejected Jesus, he comes to judgment naked and alone, holding his terrible sin in his hands. All who reject Christ will find themselves in Judas’s position when they stand before the Judge. But Christians do not come alone, in our sin, for Jesus has redeemed us and ushers us into God’s presence with our sins covered by his blood. When we believe in him, we live with him. “Through him you believe in God, who raised him from the dead and glorified him, and so your faith and hope are in God” (1 Peter 1:21). Thus, day by day, the Spirit convicts people of sin and illumines them so that they see the beauty of Jesus’ redemption and trust and hope in him.</p>
        <p>This returns us to our first theme. Holiness governs 1 Peter 1:14–16, but our passage begins and ends with hope. Through Jesus, Peter says, we believe and have confidence in God. This hope is well founded, not vain, because it rests on Jesus Christ, the Lamb of God (1:20). He has redeemed us from an empty life (1:18), covered our sins (1:19), summoned us to holiness (1:15–16), and given us reason to hope, even if we feel like strangers in our own land.</p>
        <div class="reference">
          <hr style="margin-top:1.5em"/>
          <p class="footnote">1. Frederick W. Danker, ed., <span class="mini">A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament and Other Early Christian Literature</span>, 3rd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000), 672.</p>
          <p class="footnote">2. J. Ramsey Michaels, <span class="mini">1 Peter</span>, Word Biblical Commentary 49 (Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 1988), 55. Michaels calls this a “programmatic” imperative, and puts it with other aorist imperatives that lay out Peter’s program. Grammatically, “being girded,” <span class="mini">anazōsamenoi</span>, and “being sober/attentive,” <span class="mini">nēphontes</span>, are subordinate participles modifying “hope.” Translations take them as imperatives, since participles preceding an imperative often function as imperatives.</p>
          <p class="footnote">3. For a sharp summary of Christianity’s first ethical competitors, see Ellen T. Charry, <span class="mini">God and the Art of Happiness</span> (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2010), 3–24. Epicureanism is more subtle than hedonism, whose motto, quoted by Paul in 1 Corinthians 15, dictated, “Eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we die.”</p>
          <p class="footnote">4. Efraim Karsh, <span class="mini">Islamic Imperialism: A History</span> (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2007), 73–87.</p>
          <p class="footnote">5. Jonathan Riley-Smith, <span class="mini">The Crusades: A Short History</span> (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1987), 9.</p>
          <p class="footnote">6. Thomas F. Madden, <span class="mini">The New Concise History of the Crusades</span> (Lanham, MD: Rowan & Little-field, 2006), 6–7.</p>
          <p class="footnote">7. This paragraph and the next follow ibid., 1–11; Riley-Smith, <span class="mini">Crusades</span>, 1–17, 37–40; and Edward Peters, ed., <span class="mini">The First Crusade: The Chronicle of Fulcher of Chartres and Other Source Materials</span> (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1971). I am especially indebted to private communication with medieval historian Walker Cosgrove of Dordt College.</p>
          <p class="footnote">8. All were written after the event, and after the first Crusade, the success of which may color the accounts, so that it is impossible to be certain of their accuracy. The five accounts can be found in various places; I have principally drawn on the version of August C. Krey, <span class="mini">The First Crusade: The Accounts ofEye-Witnesses andParticipants</span> (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1921), preserved in <span class="mini">The Chronicle of Fulcher of Chartres</span>.</p>
          <p class="footnote">9. Robert the Monk, in <span class="mini">The Chronicle of Fulcher of Chartres</span>, 2–3. For Robert the Monk, the translation is from Dana Munro, “The Speech of Pope Urban II at Clermont,” <span class="mini">American Historical Review</span> 11 (1906): 231–42.</p>
          <p class="footnote">10. Balderic of Dol, in <span class="mini">The Chronicle of Fulcher of Chartres</span>, 8–9.</p>
          <p class="footnote">11. Robert the Monk, in ibid., 2–5.</p>
          <p class="footnote">12. The Gesta Version, in ibid., 6.</p>
          <p class="footnote">13. Fulcher of Chartres, in ibid., 30.</p>
          <p class="footnote">14. Robert the Monk, in ibid., 4.</p>
          <p class="footnote">15. Pope Urban II, “Urban’s Letter of Instruction to the Crusaders, December, 1095,” in ibid., 16.</p>
          <p class="footnote">16. Baldric of Dol, in ibid., 9.</p>
          <p class="footnote">17. Riley-Smith, <span class="mini">Crusades</span>, 256–57.</p>
          <p class="footnote">18. C. E. B. Cranfield, <span class="mini">I & II Peter and Jude</span> (London: SCM Press, 1960), 53.</p>
          <p class="footnote">19. The <span class="smallcaps">NIV</span> and <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span> translate the Greek verb <span class="mini">epikaleō</span> as “call” in the phrase “you call on a Father” (1 Peter 1:17). In the middle voice, used here, it is an intense form of the typical word for <span class="mini">call</span>, <span class="mini">kaleō</span>. We render it “invoke.”</p>
          <p class="footnote">20. The Greek noun, <span class="mini">anastrophē</span> (a word that Peter favored), is closer to the English word <span class="mini">lifestyle</span> than <span class="mini">life</span>.</p>
        </div>

    </section>
  </body>
</html>
