<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <title>Reformed Expository Commentary: 1 Peter</title>
    <link href="../styles/mywsb-dev.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body epub:type="bodymatter">
    <section epub:type="chapter">

        <h1>3. The Authority of Peter and His Epistle</h1>
        <p class="h1sub">1 Peter 1:10–12</p>
        <p class="center" style="margin:0 3em 3em 3em"><span class="mini"> Concerning this salvation, the prophets, who spoke of the grace that was to come to you, searched intently and with the greatest care, trying to find out the time and circumstances to which the Spirit of Christ in them was pointing when he predicted the sufferings of Christ and the glories that would follow. It was revealed to them that they were not serving themselves but you, when they spoke of the things that have now been told you by those who have preached the gospel to you by the Holy Spirit sent from heaven. Even angels long to look into these things</span>. (1 Peter 1:10–12)</p>

        <h2>Peter Reflects on the Character of Scripture</h2>
        <p>Although Peter’s first epistle has no publication date, conservative scholars agree that Peter was an older man, living in Rome around <span class="smallcaps">A.D.</span>62–65, when he wrote his first epistle, as we noted in chapter 1.<sup>1</sup> Peter wrote, therefore, <span>from a lifetime of wisdom and conviction. He had experienced everything, including the trials and suffering described in the letter. As a younger man, he had walked with Jesus every day for three years. Nonetheless, as Peter writes, he does not cite his experience as the source of his knowledge and authority. He does not promote himself as a man who has seen it all from the beginning. He first cites his God-given role as an apostle: “Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to God’s elect” (1 Peter 1:1). Jesus appointed the apostles to “be with him” (Mark 3:14), to put his words into their ears (as the original of Luke 9:44 reads), and to witness everything from Jesus’ baptism to his resurrection (Acts 1:22). Jesus chose Peter to witness his deeds, to remember his words, and to declare what everything signified. He was God’s authoritative spokesman and representative.<sup>2</sup> </span></p>
        <p>Peter is at ease with this authority. He does not remind his readers of his years with the Lord, or of the singular events he witnessed. He knows that the Holy Spirit speaks through him, but he makes the point subtly in 1 Peter 1:12, implicitly counting himself among “those who have preached the gospel to you by the Holy Spirit.” Still, Peter knows that Jesus has commissioned him to present the story of Christ and its implications. In 1:10–12, he explains how God speaks and why God’s prophets (and apostles) speak with his authority.</p>
        <p>The first segment of Peter states the theme of all Scripture: “In his great mercy [God] has given us new birth into a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead” and an imperishable inheritance (1 Peter 1:3–4). Peter closes the unit by saying, “The goal of your faith [is] the salvation of your souls” (1:9). Logically, Peter could have moved directly to his next theme, the holy conduct of his people. Instead, he pauses to explain the role of Scripture in their salvation. Historically speaking, most of the people reading 1 Peter first heard of Jesus through Peter or another preacher who had a connection to the apostolic band. Yet these men did not speak on their own authority. They “preached the gospel to you by the Holy Spirit sent from heaven” (1:12). Peter wanted to prepare his readers to grow through Scripture, both from the Old Testament and from the New Testament accounts of the suffering and glory of Christ (1:11).</p>
        <p> Paul knew that his writings were authoritative. He said things such as: “This is the rule I lay down in all the churches” (1 Cor. 7:17b; cf. 15:3ff.). He said that if anyone preaches a gospel that differs from the one he preached, “let him be eternally condemned!” (Gal. 1:8–9; cf. 1 Tim. 1:15). John knew that the Spirit guided him to remember, understand, and record the words and deeds of Jesus (John 2:22; 12:16; 14:26; 20:30–31). Writing around <span class="smallcaps">A.D.</span> 65–68, Paul quotes a saying of Jesus that is recorded in Luke, and already calls it “Scripture.” He says, “For the Scripture says, . . . ‘The worker deserves his wages’ ” (1 Tim. 5:18; see Luke 10:7). So Peter joins John and Paul as New Testament writers who attest to the divine origin of their books and letters.</p>
        <p>First Peter 1:10–12 also says several things about the character of Scripture: “Concerning this salvation, the prophets, who spoke of the grace that was to come to you, searched intently and with the greatest care, trying to find out the time and circumstances to which the Spirit of Christ in them was pointing when he predicted the sufferings of Christ and the glories that would follow.” First, salvation is the theme of Scripture: “Concerning this salvation, the prophets . . . spoke” (1:10).</p>
        <p>Second, God called and appointed spokesmen to record his Word—the prophets in the Old Testament (“the prophets, who spoke”) and the apostles such as Peter in the New Testament. Paul agrees, saying, “The mystery of Christ . . . has now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit” (Eph. 3:4–5 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). If the prophets “searched intently,” they longed to discover what the Spirit was saying. Like Luke, who “carefully investigated” the life of Christ (Luke 1:3), the prophets were (ordinarily) active, not passive, agents of revelation. To be sure, the Lord sometimes told his prophets to write down exactly what he said (Isa. 30:8; Jer. 30:2; 36:2, 28; Ezek. 43:11; Hab. 2:2). Indeed, God himself rewrote the Decalogue on two stone tablets (Ex. 34:1). The Lord can use any means he wishes to ensure that we receive his inspired Word, but this passage accents the active participation of the prophets.</p>
        <p>Third, Scripture’s theme is God’s grace, given for humanity. The prophets “spoke of the grace that was to come to you” (1 Peter 1:10).</p>
        <p>Fourth, the Word came by the inspiration of God’s Spirit and yet in such a way that the prophets and apostles were active, too. The prophets “searched intently and with the greatest care” (1:10). Yet God directed them, for the <span>prophets were “trying to find out the time and circumstances to which the Spirit of Christ in them was pointing” (1:11). </span></p>
        <p>Fifth, while the prophets understandably inquired after the <span class="mini">timing</span> of God’s work, Peter stresses the <span class="mini">content</span> of God’s work and message, which he summarizes as “the sufferings of Christ and the glories that would follow” (1 Peter 1:11). Peter returns to the suffering and glory of Christ in 2:21–24; 4:13; 5:1; and 5:9. Of course, the Gospels also describe Jesus’ birth, teachings, encounters, travels, and miracles. But the suffering and glory, especially the death and resurrection, of Christ are central to his work and to our relationship with him. Peter commands believers to “rejoice that you participate in the sufferings of Christ, so that you may be overjoyed when his glory is revealed” (4:13). In his suffering on the cross, Jesus bore our sin and offered us forgiveness (2:20–25; Luke 24:25–27, 45–47). “He suffered death, so that by the grace of God he might taste death for everyone” (Heb. 2:9). Further, Peter’s churches were in travail and needed to identify with Christ in his suffering. If they did so, they could endure and so share in his glory. We must stand “firm in the faith, because you know that your brothers throughout the world are undergoing the same kind of sufferings. And the God of all grace, who called you to his eternal glory in Christ, after you have suffered a little while, will himself restore you and make you strong, firm and steadfast” (1 Peter 5:9–10).</p>
        <p>For Jesus, this “eternal glory in Christ” began with his resurrection (1 Peter 5:10; 1:3). It continued in his ascent to heaven (3:22) and in his present reign at the right hand of the Father, where all powers are subject to him (3:22b). Peter’s churches will share in that glory (5:1, 9).</p>
        <p>So, then, the prophets foretold this salvation, Jesus accomplished it, and the Spirit led Peter and the apostles to describe it. The pattern is <span class="mini">prediction</span> of salvation, the <span class="mini">fulfillment</span> of salvation, and the <span class="mini">interpretation</span> of saving events. Like all the rest of Scripture, Peter’s letter provides moral guidance, but it isn’t essentially a moral guide. Scripture contains a great many things, but in essence it describes our creation in God’s image, our rebellion and its catastrophic consequences, and then God’s plan for restoration, announced by the prophets, and accomplished in the life, death, and resurrection of Jesus. Before him we must repent, and in him we must believe. Every other theme is secondary.</p>
        <p>This leads to an interpretive key for reading the Old Testament. God reveals his plan of redemption gradually, not instantaneously. God even reveals parts of his ethical will gradually (Matt. 19:3–9). The Lord revealed his redemptive plan and his ethical norms step by step so that his people had time to grow into them. Christian leaders can learn from this: if we hope to persuade or change others, we, too, may wish to introduce new ideas and laws gradually, so that our people have time to comprehend and truly accept them.</p>
        <p>The prophets did not discover everything they longed to know. Yet they acquiesced in God’s decision to reveal what he chose, for “it was revealed to them that they were not serving themselves but you, when they spoke of the things that have now been told you by those who have preached the gospel to you by the Holy Spirit sent from heaven. Even angels long to look into these things” (1 Peter 1:12). What angels and prophets never fully saw had now been revealed. Peter further describes the nature of Scripture in his second epistle:</p>
        <p class="blockquote">Above all, you must understand that no prophecy of Scripture came about by the prophet’s own interpretation. For prophecy never had its origin in the will of man, but men spoke from God as they were carried along by the Holy Spirit. (2 Peter 1:20)</p>
        <p>So Peter teaches that Scripture is at once the work of prophets who “searched intently” and the Word of God, “for prophecy never had its origin in the will of man.” Rather, “men spoke from God” (that is, the Father) as the Holy Spirit carried them along. At times, God delivered oracles to the prophets, who wrote what they saw and heard (Isa. 13:1; 15:1; 17:1). But ordinarily the Bible’s human authors did not simply take dictation. Scripture has a dual authorship. Luke, drawing on “eyewitnesses and servants of the word,” could write an orderly account of the work of Christ because he “carefully investigated everything from the beginning” (Luke 1:2–3). Similarly, Paul wrote “with the wisdom that God gave him,” straining with all his skills to apply his gospel to the challenges of his churches. Yet the Spirit so guided his work that Peter casually notes that Paul’s letters, like “the other Scriptures,” can be hard to understand (2 Peter 3:15–16).</p>
        <p> So Peter agrees with the prophets and with Paul that Scripture is “inspired” or, more accurately, “God-breathed” (<span class="mini">theopneustos</span>), as Paul says in 2 Timothy 3:16. When we say that Scripture is God-breathed, we mean that our sixty-six books are the very words of the triune God. <span class="mini">Scripture</span> is a collective term for what we call the Old and New Testaments (Matt. 26:54–56; Luke 24:27–45; John 5:39; Acts 17:2, 11; Rom. 1:2; 15:4; 1 Cor. 15:3–4).</p>
        <p>Paul notes that Scripture is “useful for teaching, rebuking, correcting and training in righteousness, so that the man of God may be thoroughly equipped for every good work” (2 Tim. 3:16–17). Paul asserts that <span class="mini">all</span>Scripture does these four things—history and prophecy, doctrinal and moral instruction, even the genealogies. The four uses of Scripture fall into two classes—creed and conduct. Scripture teaches what to believe and how to behave. The word <span class="mini">teaching</span> is <span class="mini">didaskalia</span>, which in Paul almost always means “doctrinal instruction.” <span class="mini">Rebuking</span>, <span class="mini">elegmon</span>, belongs to a word family that commonly has the sense of correcting or pointing out a mistake, whether moral or doctrinal. Thus, training in the truth will lead to correction of false ideas. But doctrine is practical, too, and false teaching leads to sin. So Scripture also corrects wrongdoing. It trains us in righteousness and prepares us for good works.<sup>3</sup></p>
        <p>We say that Scripture is <span class="mini">inspired</span> because it proceeds from the mouth of God, through the agency of the Holy Spirit, and from the work of his chosen apostles and prophets. Because God is truth and always tells the truth, his “word is truth” (John 17:17). If it is true, it contains no errors. It is <span class="mini">inerrant</span>. Because God stands behind his Word, it will never fail. It is <span class="mini">infallible</span>. God pledges that his Word is the truth about himself and his salvation, and the guide to the church’s faith and practice.</p>
        <p>As all Christian leaders know, these traits make it essential to read Scripture in public worship and in private, as a guide to daily life. Leaders might not realize that most people, even in the church, read the Bible sporadically. Many hardly read the Bible outside of worship services. Sadly, even many church leaders read the Bible only occasionally. Christian leaders tend to address this through straight exhortations: “You need to read the Bible more!” We should extol the virtues of reading and <span>meditation, but we should also teach people how to read and meditate more fruitfully. </span></p>
        <p>Leaders should also read and expound the Bible in public worship. We can use biblical texts for confessions of faith, confessions of sin, and assurances of pardon. We can sing the Scriptures, including the Psalms. We can have Old Testament and New Testament readings. Sermons should feature the reading and exposition of Scripture. Pastors, as a corollary, can preach through books of the Bible, lest they focus unduly on favorite topics and miss the whole counsel of God (Acts 20:27).</p>
        <p>Finally, let’s remember that however valuable private reading and public teaching are, disciples also grow through study and discussion in small groups. We should be thankful that we have so many ways to hear or read excellent teaching, but we also need to seek the truth actively. For many people, the best way to do that is in a small group. Jesus and the apostles followed this practice.</p>
        <p>Peter mentions the Spirit twice, so let’s remember that he illumines minds and opens hearts to his truth. Pastors see this in surprising ways. We study, plan, and prepare to preach, but most of us also diverge from our notes at times. Sometimes a thought comes to us spontaneously, and we say it, with surprising results. One day a man strode up to me and said, “Five years ago you said something that changed my life. I was such a hypocrite; I’m not sure if I was a Christian or not, but I certainly wasn’t serious. So thank you.” As he told me what I had said, I was dumbfounded. The lesson he shared seemed both true and important, but I was sure I had not said it, and told him so: “What you say is certainly true and I believe it, but it’s not the kind of thing I would say in public. I’m truly happy for you, but you must be thinking of someone else.”</p>
        <p>He looked at me strangely, and then began to quote my sermon line by line: “You said A, then B, then C, then D—the words God used to change my life.” Suddenly, I realized that he was right! I remembered the week, when the topic that led to “the words that changed his life” had been in my thoughts. It wasn’t in my notes, but it had been on my mind, and the Spirit nudged me to say what his receptive heart needed to hear. So our words become more than we plan, yet what he intends.</p>
        <p>No teacher living today has a status like that of the apostles. Jesus chose and trained them, and the Spirit moved in them. Peter followed Jesus, but <span>after the resurrection, Peter also studied, ministered, and spoke with other apostles (Gal. 2:1–10). In this way, he spent years preparing to write. Yet alongside Peter’s human activities, the Spirit kept pointing him to Christ and carried him along so that his errors fell away as he wrote (1 Peter 1:11; 2 Peter 1:21). Peter wrote <span class="mini">what</span>he knew, yet he wrote <span class="mini">better</span> than he knew.</span></p>

        <h2>The Reliability of the New Testament</h2>
        <p>The Bible doesn’t ask us to accept these claims as a matter of blind faith. There are reasons to believe that the Bible is reliable, reasons that should gain the respect of any open-minded person, especially if he is trained in evaluating historical evidence. A wide literature shows how historical remains, such as stone inscriptions and archaeological artifacts, verify the Bible’s historical accounts. Evangelicals have written masterly defenses of the reliability of the Gospels and Acts.<sup>4</sup></p>
        <p>Scripture shows that Jesus prepared Peter, the disciples, and other New Testament writers for their work. Jesus appointed the apostles to “be with him” and to witness everything (Mark 3:14; Matt. 17:5; Acts 1:22). Some people treasured events and remembered them (Luke 2:19; 22:61; 24:8). Others did careful research. Luke knew many accounts of Jesus’ life. He consulted “those who from the first were eyewitnesses and servants of the word,” and then “carefully investigated everything from the beginning” (Luke 1:1–4). Similarly, Paul studied for fourteen years in Arabia and consulted with no one before he became the apostle to the Gentiles (Gal. 1:15–2:10). John relates that Jesus performed “many . . . miraculous signs in the presence of his disciples” (John 20:30; see also 21:25). His gospel did not hold them all, but they present enough evidence “that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that by believing you may have life in his name” (20:31). Finally, Peter said, “We did not follow cleverly invented stories when we told you about the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but we were eyewitnesses of his majesty” (2 Peter 1:16).</p>
        <p> But as we affirm the reliability of the New Testament, we have more than the claims of the apostles. There are objective, historical reasons to believe that the apostles recorded events accurately. We can consider five of them.</p>
        <p>First, we can trust their record of Jesus’ words because memorization was essential to education in Israel (and other lands). Jewish students were expected to memorize every word of their teachers. Teachers repeated their main ideas again and again until students knew them by heart. Since the ancients lacked opportunity to retrieve data from the sources we have today, they developed superior skill in memorization. Jesus’ disciples treasured his words, and because he was an itinerant preacher, they heard his teachings many times. Beyond that, Israelites sometimes took notes on the teachings of their rabbis.<sup>5</sup> Second, ancient Greeks and Romans had standards for historical writing. Herodotus, called the father of history, was roundly criticized, five hundred years before the New Testament, for putting unsubstantiated fables and tales into his accounts. Around 400 B.C., Thucydides said that he confined himself to factual reports of contemporary political and military events, based on firsthand eyewitness accounts, although he admitted that he sometimes summarized the main points of a speech as best he could.</p>
        <p>Both secular people and believers knew the difference between history and fabrication. An elder was deprived of his office for embellishing the history of Peter, even though the embellishment was edifying. In his treatise <span class="mini">On Baptism</span>, Tertullian asked whether women could baptize in an emergency. Those who answer in the affirmative claim <span class="mini">The Acts of Paul</span>, an “edifying” Christian novel, as evidence, since a woman teaches and baptizes in that document. Tertullian says, “But if the writings which wrongly go under Paul’s name, claim [this] example as a license for women’s teaching and baptizing, let them know that, the [leader] who composed that writing . . . if he were augmenting Paul’s fame” was convicted of fabricating events. The leader confessed that “he had done it from love of Paul” and was yet removed from office.<sup>6</sup> Clearly, early Christians were aware of fabrication, guarded against it, and punished it, even if the content was orthodox and the author well intended.</p>
        <p>In the ancient church, most people spoke Greek. Since the New Testament is in Greek, there was no need for a translation; everyone understood <span>the original. One day a preacher spoke on Mark’s account of the lame man whose friends brought him to Jesus, ultimately lowering him through a hole in the roof so that he lay on his stretcher before Jesus. The word used for this stretcher in Mark 2 is a common one—<span class="mini">krabbatos</span>. The preacher substituted a more literary or elegant Greek word—<span class="mini">skimpeus</span>—for the original. Immediately someone within the congregation called out, “Are you superior to the one who said <span class="mini">krabbatos</span>?” So the church had great interest in accuracy.<sup>7</sup></span></p>
        <p>Third, some events are unforgettable. Memorable events emblazon themselves on the minds of witnesses. I will never forget walking my daughters down the aisle for their weddings, nor the look on my own bride’s face as we took our vows. I remember my dissertation defense; I recall the time that a group of policemen accused me of murder and pulled their guns on me. I even remember my teammates jumping on me when I got the winning hit with two outs in the last inning of a Little League baseball game—and a great deal more besides. You, my reader, also have dozens of indelible memories. Think, then, of the disciples when Jesus calmed the storm at sea, when Jesus called the risen Lazarus, still wrapped in graveclothes, out of his tomb with the thunder of command. Imagine the moment they saw the risen Christ. These events burned themselves into the disciples’ memories. They could never forget them. Yet even if one disciple did forget something, he could consult the others.</p>
        <p>Fourth, living witnesses had a role. The New Testament names little-known Roman officials such as Pilate and Gallio, whose identities are verified by secular accounts, but they also name ordinary people. The four Gospels cite specific events that occurred in named towns. For example, Jesus healed blind Bartimaeus, who used to beg outside Jericho on the road to Jerusalem (Mark 10:46). When Jesus raised Lazarus, he was in a small town near Jerusalem named Bethany (John 11:1). When Jesus stumbled under the cross, Simon of Cyrene, father of Alexander and Rufus, carried it for him (Mark 15:21). As Richard Bauckham argues in his meticulous study, these are real people, known to the church, known in their towns.<sup>8</sup>The Gospels would have been instantly discredited if fabricated stories reached such towns as Jericho and Bethany where the Gospels say they occurred. But the Gospels were not discredited. <span>No, they were received as Scripture everywhere they went.<sup>9</sup> The book of Acts also gives officials specific titles and places them in known cities.<sup>10</sup> </span></p>
        <p>Fifth, the witnesses sealed their testimony with their lives. It is true that people will die for a lie. This happens most readily when people are duped. Sometimes a person will die for what he or she knows to be a lie—if that lie brought the person great benefits. But the disciples gained no earthly benefits from their testimony to Jesus. They suffered every kind of abuse, and almost all eventually died for their testimony. Yet the disciples staked their lives to Jesus to the end. None moved on to a second career. None recanted to save his skin. They all lived and died for their testimony about Jesus because they knew it was true.</p>
        <p>I hope you believe the Bible is God’s Word, the sure guide to faith and life. But even if you don’t, there are reasons to believe it is reliable, reasons to warrant a careful reading. Yet Scripture can be hard to understand, as Peter himself says when describing Paul’s letters. How can we gain from reading Scripture?</p>

        <h2>How Should We Read the Bible?</h2>
        <p>First, we read the Bible <span class="mini">seriously</span>. This means that we take the Bible literally when it expects us to do so, but we read it metaphorically when appropriate. Peter expects us to take it literally when he reports that Jesus performed miracles, died on the cross, and rose again. The Bible also uses metaphors. Second Chronicles 16:9 says that “the eyes of the L<span class="smallcaps">ORD</span> range throughout the earth.” This does not mean that God literally has eyes that rapidly run over the land. Jesus uses hyperbole: “If your right hand causes you to sin, cut it off and throw it away” (Matt. 5:30). We see no battalions of one-handed Christians. But we do take our sin seriously, and take action to remove it from our lives.</p>
        <p>Second, we read <span class="mini">holistically</span>. That is, we don’t snatch isolated statements from the Bible and find meaning that the authors never intended. We let <span>the Bible’s grand themes guide us. Jesus declared that Scripture’s theme is his person and work: </span></p>
        <p class="blockquote">Everything must be fulfilled that is written about me in the Law of Moses, the Prophets and the Psalms. . . . <br/><span style="margin-left:1.5em">This is what is written: The Christ will suffer and rise from the dead on the third day, and repentance and forgiveness of sins will be preached in his name to all nations, beginning at Jerusalem. (Luke 24:44–47)</span></p>
        <p style="text-indent:0">The promises give us <span class="mini">hope</span> of a Redeemer; the law reveals our <span class="mini">need</span>of a Redeemer. The history of Israel shows that no one is faithful and so teaches us to long for the faithful, Jesus. The leadership structures of Israel also lead us to Christ. He is the Great Prophet, revealing God to the world. He is the Great High Priest, offering the final sacrifice. He is the Great King, protecting his people from their foes.</p>
        <p>Third, we read the Bible <span class="mini">personally</span>. We take the Bible to heart instead of using it to condemn others. How often preachers hear this: “Wonderful message, Pastor; I wish my friend had come to hear it. She really needs it.” Yes, the friend probably does need to hear it, but did <span class="mini">you</span> hear it? Let’s apply God’s Word to ourselves and remove the plank from our own eye before we remove a speck from our neighbor’s.</p>
        <p>Finally, we should read the Bible <span class="mini">meditatively</span>. It’s good to listen to teachers and preachers, whether live or through a convenient medium, but at some point, if someone wants to grow as a Christian, he or she must become an active reader, carefully contemplating everything the Word says. We must also read with godly goals. Donald Carson observes:</p>
        <p class="blockquote">We human beings are a strange lot. We hear high moral injunctions and glimpse just a little the genuine beauty of perfect holiness, and then prostitute the vision by dreaming about the way others would hold us in high esteem if we were like that. The demand for genuine perfection loses itself in the lesser goal of external piety; the goal of pleasing the Father is traded for its pygmy cousin, the goal of pleasing men.<sup>11</sup></p>
        <p>So let us read meditatively, to apply Scripture to ourselves, that we might repent and believe and grow in godliness. Let us read for real history, for sound doctrine, and for the person of Jesus Christ, Son of God and Savior.</p>
        <div class="reference">
          <hr style="margin-top:1.5em"/>
          <p class="footnote">1. Again, “Babylon” is code for “Rome” (1 Peter 5:13).</p>
          <p class="footnote">2. Herman N. Ridderbos, <span class="mini">Redemptive History and the New Testament Scriptures</span>, 2nd rev. ed. (Phillipsburg, NJ: Presbyterian and Reformed, 1988), 12–41.</p>
          <p class="footnote">3. B. B. Warfield, <span class="mini">The Inspiration and Authority of Scripture</span> (Philadelphia: Presbyterian and Reformed, 1948), 234–39, 299; Daniel M. Doriani, <span class="mini">Putting the Truth to Work: The Theory and Practice of Biblical Application</span> (Phillipsburg, NJ: P&R Publishing, 2001), 55–57, 213ff.</p>
          <p class="footnote">4. To mention just a few, see Craig S. Keener, <span class="mini">The Historical Jesus of the Gospels</span> (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2009), a densely detailed study of the reliability of the Gospels. At a slightly more popular level, see companion works by Craig Blomberg, <span class="mini">The Historical Reliability of the Gospels</span>, 2nd ed. (Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 2007), and <span class="mini">The Historical Reliability of John’s Gospel</span> (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2002). For Acts, see note 10 below.</p>
          <p class="footnote">5. E. E. Ellis, <span class="mini">Prophecy Hermeneutic</span> (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1978), 242–47.</p>
          <p class="footnote">6. Tertullian, <span class="mini">On Baptism</span>, trans. S. Thelwall, in <span class="mini">Ante-Nicene Fathers</span>, ed. Alexander Roberts and James Donaldson, 9 vols. (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1979–85), 3:677.</p>
          <p class="footnote">7. Eta Linnemann, <span class="mini">Is There a Synoptic Problem? Rethinking the Literary Dependence of the First Three Gospels</span>, trans. Robert Yarbrough (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1992), x.</p>
          <p class="footnote">8. Richard Bauckham, <span class="mini">Jesus and the Eyewitnesses: The Gospels as Eyewitness Testimony</span> (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2006), 39–66. A meticulously detailed work.</p>
          <p class="footnote">9. Bruce Metzger, <span class="mini">The Canon of the New Testament: Its Origin, Development and Significance</span> (New York: Oxford University Press, 1987).</p>
          <p class="footnote">10. See Colin Hemer, <span class="mini">The Book of Acts in the Setting of Hellenistic History</span>, trans. C. H. Gempf (Tübingen: J. C. B. Mohr [Paul Siebeck], 1989); F. F. Bruce, “The Acts of the Apostles: Historical Record or Theological Reconstruction?,” in <span class="mini">Aufstieg und Niedergang der römischen Welt II 25/3</span>, ed. W. Haase (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1985), 2596–603; W. W. Gasque, “The Historical Value of Acts,” <span class="mini">Tyndale Bulletin</span> 40 (1989): 136–57; William Mitchell Ramsay, <span class="mini">The Bearing of Recent Discovery on the Trustworthiness of the New Testament</span> (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1979).</p>
          <p class="footnote">11. D. A. Carson, <span class="mini">The Sermon on the Mount: An Evangelical Exposition of Matthew 5–7</span> (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1978), 55.</p>
        </div>

    </section>
  </body>
</html>
