<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <title>Reformed Expository Commentary: 1 Peter</title>
    <link href="../styles/mywsb-dev.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body epub:type="bodymatter">
    <section epub:type="chapter">

        <h1>10. The Good Life, the Peaceable Kingdom</h1>
        <p class="h1sub">1 Peter 3:8–12</p>
        <p class="center" style="margin:0 3em 3em 3em"><span class="mini">  Whoever would love life and see good days must keep his tongue from evil and his lips from deceitful speech. He must turn from evil and do good; he must seek peace and pursue it.</span> (1 Peter 3:10–11)</p>
        <p style="text-indent:0"><span class="dcap bgcolor">F</span>irst Peter 3:8–12 begins with a phrase that sounds as though the author were wrapping something up: “Finally, all of you, have unity of mind, sympathy, brotherly love, a tender heart, and a<span/>humble mind” (1 Peter 3:8 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). Indeed, Peter is concluding something—not his entire epistle, but his survey of the principal duties of Christians, which he began in 1 Peter 1:13. Peter has moved from general duties to specific obligations and back to general duties. Because God is holy, we are to be holy (1:16). Because Jesus ransomed us from a vain life and because we tasted his goodness, we put away specific sins, such as malice and deceit (1:18–2:3). Because of God’s redemptive work, we are his chosen people, a holy nation that abstains from the passions of the flesh and maintains good conduct (2:4–12). Holiness also manifests itself in life’s several social structures.<span>Every believer submits to governing authorities, whether local or global (2:13–17). Servants submit to masters, whether they merit respect or not, for Jesus submitted in the same way (2:18–25). Finally, husbands and wives live together in grace and mutual honor (3:1–7). </span></p>

        <h2>Attractive Christian Traits</h2>
        <p>If we act in these ways, Peter says that we can ordinarily expect to live well and enjoy God’s favor. He asks, “Who is going to harm you if you are eager to do good?” (1 Peter 3:13). The next section admits that it <span class="mini">is</span> possible to suffer harm for doing good (3:14–17). If we live by God’s standards, we will never quite fit into any human culture. This was true in the empire, where the Christians’ allegiance to Jesus as Lord and refusal to worship the emperor could be taken as a sign of dissent. Today, there is always a moral cause, often involving sexual ethics, in which evangelical Christians take the minority view. To the secularist, the Christian position might sound judgmental, intolerant, or bigoted, so we court disfavor.</p>
        <p>Nonetheless, 1 Peter 3:8–13 states the norm. A good life allows peace. Whatever we may say about life in an alien culture, under hostile authorities, the greater part of the Christian life concerns the character and disciplines that shape daily actions and our universal responsibilities. So Peter describes the virtues that bless everyone: harmony, sympathy, love, compassion, and humility. Later he mentions forgiveness, hospitality, and generosity (4:8–10). Earlier Peter said that holy women used to adorn themselves with the “unfading beauty of a gentle and quiet spirit” (3:4–5). Now he mentions the traits that make everyone attractive.</p>

        <h3>Peace</h3>
        <p>We pay great attention to appearances when we first meet someone. With a glance, we assess gender, age, height, weight, and facial characteristics. We judge whether the person is confident or reticent, friendly or hostile, open or closed. We assess social status and strength by glancing at clothing, hair, and posture. Visual cues are vital at first. Yet as we discover the person’s skills and character, appearances matter less and less. Much more, the Lord looks at the heart and assesses our character. Peter says, “Finally, all of you, <span>have unity of mind, sympathy, brotherly love, a tender heart, and a humble mind” (1 Peter 3:8 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>).</span></p>
        <p>At first glance, Peter seems to list five random virtues. On closer inspection, a pattern emerges. The first and last are mental or intellectual, the second and fourth are emotional, and brotherly love stands at the center. Further, all these traits have a social dimension. Together, they keep relationships healthy.</p>

        <h3>Unity</h3>
        <p>Strong relationships begin with “unity of mind” (<span class="mini">homophrones</span>). To have one mind is not to have identical opinions about politics, philosophy, ethics, business, food, music, and leisure. Rather, unity means that we are “agreeable and sensitive to each other’s concerns.”<sup>1</sup> Unity comes not from a creed or a law laid upon us, nor from a pretense that we agree when we actually disagree, but from relationships, respectful dialogue, and common causes.</p>

        <h3>Love</h3>
        <p>First Peter 3:8 mentions three forms of love—sympathy, brotherly love, compassion. Sympathy and compassion are emotional virtues. Sympathy is the ability to feel what another feels, whether in joy or in sorrow. We must “rejoice with those who rejoice [and] mourn with those who mourn” (Rom. 12:15). If one suffers, all suffer. If one is honored, all rejoice (1 Cor. 12:26). To sympathize is to enter the experience of others and, if possible, to act on what we feel. Jesus sympathizes with us in our weakness. He “has been tempted in every way, just as we are, yet was without sin,” so he knows our struggles (Heb. 4:15). Among humans, sympathy largely rests on shared pains, but Jesus is both strong and empathetic! He doesn’t merely sympathize with us in our battle against evil; he defeats Satan and the powers of evil. He feels <span class="mini">with</span> us and acts <span class="mini">for</span> us.</p>
        <p>The term translated “brotherly love” (<span class="mini">philadelphos</span>) could be rendered “brotherly affection.” The command to love one another is foundational (John 13:34–35; cf. 1 Thess. 4:9). Jesus set a high standard when he said, “As I have loved you, so you must love one another” (John 13:34). In his kindness, his insight into our souls, and his sacrifice for our sins, Jesus embodies love. <span>Jesus identifies “Love your neighbor as yourself ” as the second great command (Matt. 22:39). Paul agrees: “Be devoted to one another in brotherly love” (Rom. 12:10). </span></p>
        <p>A slight misconception of love has grown up in some Christian circles. Many are aware that Greek has four principal terms for <span class="mini">love</span> and that three of them appear in the New Testament.<sup>2</sup> Among these, we ordinarily give pride of place to <span class="mini">agapē</span>, which we call divine love. We commonly say that <span class="mini">agapē</span> is the greatest or purest form of love, since God has this love even for his enemies. But the contrast between the various words for <span class="mini">love</span> isn’t sharp; the terms overlap and can be used interchangeably. Indeed, the verb <span class="mini">phileō</span>, from the same family as <span class="mini">philia</span> (typically, affectionate love), often appears in John’s gospel, where it describes the Father’s love for the Son (John 5:20), the Father’s love for us (16:27), and Jesus’ love for his disciples (11:36; 20:2).<sup>3</sup> Further, the Septuagint uses <span class="mini">agapaō</span> for Amnon’s sexual passion for Tamar; we would expect a form of the word <span class="mini">eros</span>.</p>
        <p>Since <span class="mini">agapē</span> goes to enemies, it is based neither on feelings for the loved one nor on beauty or virtue that we see in that person. Indeed, we can make the case that <span class="mini">agapē</span> is greater than human or brotherly affection (<span class="mini">philia</span>), since <span class="mini">agapē</span> is indiscriminate and inclusive, going to every neighbor or stranger who crosses our path. Further, God himself is the source and model of <span class="mini">agapē</span>. By contrast, the love of human affection (which <span class="mini">philia</span> often, but not always, signifies) is exclusive and discriminating. It goes to friends, to the attractive, the skillful, the few. It would seem that such love rises from natural admiration, so that there is no need to require it. Nonetheless, Romans 12:10; 1 Thessalonians 4:9; Hebrews 13:1; and 1 Peter 3:8 all bless and command brotherly, affectionate love. The apostles blessed tender affection between friends and family members.</p>
        <p>When Christians say that <span class="mini">agapē</span>is the highest form of love because it is Godlike and dispassionate, they probably mean that love for enemies is noble and amazing, which it is. And <span class="mini">agapē is</span> often the term for God’s love for unattractive sinners. But God wants, even <span class="mini">expects</span>, us to <span class="mini">feel affection</span> for each other. And we can show affection in a warm embrace and in acts of kindness. In short, love is not essentially dispassionate. It <span class="mini">can be</span> dispassionate—and <span>it must be if we are to love someone who is misbehaving. But God created us with emotions, so we love emotionally. </span></p>
        <p>The final aspect of love in 1 Peter 3:8 is compassion. Compassion is the emotion or feeling of love, tenderness, generosity, and warmth. Compassion and sympathy come naturally to some. Others have to work to open themselves to it. Some of us are drawn to babies, lonely old people, and sad emotional stories. Others want to run away from all three. Few of us gladly listen to sorrowful friends. Eventually, we want to say, “Don’t be a baby. Toughen up. Your problems are nothing. You brought this on yourself. Fight through it and you’ll be stronger.”<sup>4</sup> In short, whether by nature or nurture, many of us lack sympathy and compassion. In that case, we should question our inclinations, for God is compassionate (Ex. 34:6). Jesus is kind and tender, and he expects us to grow toward conformity to him (Eph. 4:32; Rom. 8:29).</p>

        <h3>Humility</h3>
        <p>The final blessed trait of 1 Peter 3:8 is humility. It is easy to see that humility, listed last, corresponds to unity, listed first. To be humble is to suppress the desire to be important and to put our interests first. Since most quarrels come from a desire to have our way, we see that humility fosters unity. Jesus is the supreme model of humility. “Your attitude should be the same as that of Christ Jesus: ‘Who, being in very nature God, did not consider equality with God something to be grasped, but made himself nothing, taking the very nature of a servant’ ” (Phil. 2:5–7).</p>
        <p>In book 7 of his <span class="mini">Republic</span>, Plato commented that the best governors are reluctant to hold power, not eager for it, so that the man who hungers to rule the republic is ipso facto unfit to rule it. George Washington exemplified this in 1788. He hoped to retire from public life and tend his farms, but when America needed a leader, all eyes turned to him and he agreed to serve again. The person who hungers for rule is unfit for rule.</p>
        <p>Humility must not be confused with a poor self-concept. It’s “a willingness to take the lower place, to perform the less exalted service,” and to put the interests of others ahead of our own.<sup>5</sup>As John Calvin said, self-denial is a <span>good summary of the Christian life.<sup>6</sup> This has nothing to do with personal style. One can be humble <span class="mini">and</span> assertive. The problem is not assertion; it is <span class="mini">self-assertion</span>. When I was a young pastor, the CEO of a local company and former navy commander came to my small church. I was not yet thirty years old, and when we spoke I braced myself, even physically, standing with my feet wide apart, shoulders square, leaning toward him, so that his sheer will didn’t blow me against the nearest wall. He was very assertive, but because he didn’t assert himself, he was a humble man.</span></p>

        <h2>Nonretaliation</h2>
        <p>First Peter 3:9 urges, “Do not pay evil with evil or insult with insult, but with blessing, because to this you were called so that you may inherit a blessing.” First Peter 3:8 and 9 present contrasting commands. The opposite of love (3:8) is mean-spirited justice, the cycle of insult and counterinsult, blows and counterblows, retaliations and retaliation for prior retaliation (3:9). That describes life between many hostile groups that border on each other—Serbs and Bosnians, Israelis and Palestinians, Shiites and Sunnis, and many more.</p>
        <p>Instead of cursing, we should bless. There is a time for silence, as Jesus showed during his trial (Matt. 26:63). But ordinarily we should be ready to bless those who curse or persecute us (Rom. 12:14; 1 Cor. 4:12). In Scripture, this blessing could be a general word of kindness or <span class="mini">the</span> word of blessing, the gospel. Jesus commanded us to love our enemies, to pray for them, and so to bless them (Matt. 5:44). He practiced what he preached, speaking words of blessing from the cross. We can do the same in politics and work, in families and friendships.</p>
        <p>As Peter knows, it is human nature to do the opposite, repaying injury for injury. Some people even seem to delight in taking offense, feeling wounded, and claiming victim status, even if there is no real harm. A few years ago, I planned to go to Brazil to speak at a conference. Alas, I failed to realize that standards had shifted, so that my visa, which still had life on it from a prior conference, was invalid. I was turned away as I tried to board my plane, and the nearest Brazilian consulate could not set things <span> right in time. Behind this shift in visa policy, I later learned, lay a diplomatic squabble. American officials had allegedly refused to admit some well-qualified Brazilians. The Brazilians took umbrage and retaliated by refusing entry to Americans. </span></p>
        <p>Who starts these skirmishes? Who ends them? Who gets hurt, without reason, in the interim? Peter declares, “Do not repay evil with evil,” but bless “that you may inherit a blessing” (1 Peter 3:9). In the Old Testament, the blessing was the Promised Land. In 1:4–7, Peter says that the blessing is now eternal life, which begins when Jesus returns. The principle of returning good for evil follows Jesus’ word: “Forgive, and you will be forgiven. Give, and it will be given to you. . . . With the measure you use, it will be measured to you” (Luke 6:37–38). More than that, the prime example of nonretaliation is our conversion, for God called us when we were still his enemies. May we therefore seek ways to bless friend and foe, even if they fail us.</p>

        <h2>Living in Peace</h2>
        <p>First Peter 3:10–12 is essentially a long quotation from Psalm 34. David wrote it as praise: “I will extol the L<span class="smallcaps">ORD</span> . . . . Glorify the L<span class="smallcaps">ORD</span> with me” (Ps. 34:1–3). Yet the psalm moves from the blessing of God to the fear of God, and the fear of the Lord plays itself out in daily life. David’s God-fearing counsel for life nicely fits Peter’s interest in discipleship in difficult times. Peter knows that persecution causes troubles, but there are ways to minimize trouble; Peter quotes some from Psalm 34:</p>
        <p class="blockquote">Whoever would love life <br/><span style="margin-left:1.2em"/>and see good days <br/>must keep his tongue from evil <br/><span style="margin-left:1.2em"/>and his lips from deceitful speech. <br/>He must turn from evil and do good; <br/><span style="margin-left:1.2em"/>he must seek peace and pursue it. (1 Peter 3:10–11, quoting Ps. 34:12–14 )</p>
        <p>“Life” in 1 Peter 3:10 refers to life on earth. The prospect of “good days” shows that Peter momentarily put aside the specter of persecution. He considers how disciples might live when life is fair, when skies are blue, when <span>justice and peace prevail. How might we keep the peace in ordinary times? Peter answers with a short blast of wisdom literature. If you love life and want good days, do things that facilitate peace. </span></p>
        <p>What Peter calls “good days” is roughly what we call happiness. Social scientists have studied happiness for years and have reached consistent conclusions. The poor are generally less happy, but once someone escapes poverty, his or her wealth, career success, and individual liberty add little to happiness. Arduous and constructive challenges are important, but “the daily activities most associated with happiness are all social” things such as a strong marriage and time spent with friends.<sup>7</sup></p>
        <p>First, then, to enjoy “good days”—and good relationships—we must control our tongues. Previously, 1 Peter mentioned verbal sins such as accusing, denouncing, blaspheming, and ridiculing. Here Peter mentions deceit and “evil” speech, which, judging by all Scripture, would include gossip, slander, boasting, bragging, lying, making false promises or vows, rudeness, and abuse of God’s name. The opposite is to speak the truth in love, to praise God, and to bless humanity.</p>
        <p>Second, we must “turn from evil and do good” (1 Peter 3:11). Peter talks about the right behavior of a disciple in two ways. First Peter 1 says that we must be holy because God is holy. Holiness signifies consecration to God and separation from sin (1:15–16; 2:5–9; 3:5). The statement “Be holy in all your <span class="mini">conduct</span>,” or way of life (1:15 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>), provides a bridge to the other aspect of right behavior, which is <span class="mini">doing good</span>to others. The language of “doing good” appears just twelve times in the New Testament, and six of them are in Peter.<sup>8</sup></p>
        <p>Doing good is the active, outward-facing aspect of Christian conduct. Holiness signifies <span class="mini">separation</span>, even withdrawal, from the evils of this world. By contrast, when we do good we engage the world, seek to reverse evil. We put up buildings, create constructive institutions, perform music, and generally do whatever our skill and experience allows. To <span class="mini">do</span>good is to <span class="mini">bring</span> good to all. By doing good, Peter says, believers silence the accusations of foolish men (1 Peter 2:14–15). Three times Peter urges readers to <span>continue doing good in the face of suffering (2:20; 3:17; 4:19). He also tells wives to follow Sarah and do good, whether their husbands share their faith or not (3:6). By doing good, we can frustrate the hostility of some and win others (2:15; 3:1). </span></p>
        <p>The good we enjoy follows the good we do. If we want a good life, we should “turn from evil and do good.” This is not a call to naiveté. When Jesus sent his disciples into a hostile society, he told them to be as wise as serpents. We should not needlessly expose ourselves to harm. But always, <span class="mini">always</span>, we strive to “do good to all people,” even if our special focus is “the family of believers” (Gal. 6:10). So, then, in normal times, if we do good we will live well. If we greet people warmly, they will be glad to see us. If we laugh away minor problems, we will have more friends.</p>
        <p>Third, life will be good if we “seek peace and pursue it.” This theme runs through New Testament epistles. Like Peter, Hebrews 12:14 links holiness and the pursuit of peace: “Make every effort to live in peace with all men and to be holy.” Likewise, Paul tells us, “If it is possible, as far as it depends on you, live at peace with everyone” (Rom. 12:18). We notice the provisos. First, it might not be possible to attain peace. Second, peacemaking requires at least two parties. We can do only our part. Sadly, it is impossible to make peace with some people. So there is a time to give up the quest. And as Proverbs 26:17 warns, “Like one who seizes a dog by the ears is a passer-by who meddles in a quarrel not his own.”</p>
        <p>To summarize, then, we find the good life when we follow Peter’s five imperatives: stop evil speech, turn from evil deeds, do good, seek peace, and pursue it. The core command is to do good to others.</p>
        <p>Then, Peter concludes, we will experience God’s favor: “For the eyes of the Lord are on the righteous and his ears are attentive to their prayer, but the face of the Lord is against those who do evil” (1 Peter 3:12). This sounds much like the classic benediction of Numbers 6:24–26:</p>
        <p class="blockquote">The L<span class="smallcaps">ORD</span> bless you <br/><span style="margin-left:1.2em"/>and keep you; <br/>the L<span class="smallcaps">ORD</span> make his face shine upon you <br/><span style="margin-left:1.2em"/>and be gracious to you; <br/>the L<span class="smallcaps">ORD</span> turn his face toward you <br/><span style="margin-left:1.2em"/>and give you peace.</p>
        <p>Yet we notice that there is more here than blessing. The Lord “is against those who do evil.” This is vindication, not vindictiveness. For the faithful to enjoy peace, their accusers must be silenced and their enemies stopped, even judged. In <span class="mini">Beyond Good and Evil</span>, Friedrich Nietzsche derides Christianity as one of the religions or ethics with the slave morality that praises charity, piety, restraint, smallness, and submission. It has none of the life-affirming boldness of great men, but rather a pitiful hope that God will later avenge suffering believers.</p>
        <p>But Nietzsche misconstrues the Christian ethic. We do good wherever we are, and we are realistic about the power structures of the world. We gain our freedom if we can (1 Cor. 7:21), we make peace if we can, and we entrust the results of all our actions to God, who is—this is realism—the Judge of all (1 Peter 2:23).</p>
        <p>So Peter has explained how we might find a good and peaceful life. If we avoid evil words and deeds, do good to all, and submit to proper authorities, it will ordinarily lead to a good life in the present. That does not always happen, as Peter soon points out. We might still do good and suffer for it. If so, at least we know that the Lord’s eyes see the righteous, that his ears hear our prayers, and that the same face that favors us opposes evil.</p>
        <p>These graces are ours by the faith in Jesus that unites us to him. That faith lets us live well, speak blessings, repay evil with good, and live in harmony, sympathy, love, compassion, and humility. When troubles come, we then have the assurance that we have done what we could to avoid them. And when they come, we know that the Lord hears our cry. That should be enough to move us to live faithfully in his kingdom.</p>
        <div class="reference">
          <hr style="margin-top:1.5em"/>
          <p class="footnote">1. J. Ramsey Michaels, <span class="mini">1 Peter</span>, Word Biblical Commentary 49 (Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 1988), 176.</p>
          <p class="footnote">2. The four are <span class="mini">agapē</span>, <span class="mini">philia</span>, <span class="mini">storgē</span>, <span class="mini">eros</span>.</p>
          <p class="footnote">3. The emotional component may be weaker in some of these cases, but there is no reason to believe it has disappeared.</p>
          <p class="footnote">4. See Dan B. Allender, <span class="mini">The Healing Path: How the Hurts in Your Past Can Lead You to a More Abundant Life</span> (Colorado Springs: WaterBrook, 1999), 3–16.</p>
          <p class="footnote">5. Peter H. Davids, <span class="mini">The First Epistle of Peter</span> (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1990), 125.</p>
          <p class="footnote">6. John Calvin, <span class="mini">Institutes of the Christian Religion</span>, trans. Ford Lewis Battles (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1960), 3.7.1–10.</p>
          <p class="footnote">7. David Brooks, <span class="mini">The Social Animal: The Hidden Sources of Love, Character, and Achievement</span> (New York: Random House, 2011), 195–97.</p>
          <p class="footnote">8. The family of terms is <span class="mini">agathopoieō</span>, <span class="mini">agathopoiia</span>, <span class="mini">agathopoios</span>. They appear in 1 Peter 2:15, 20; 3:1, 6, 17; 4:19.</p>
        </div>

    </section>
  </body>
</html>
