<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <title>Reformed Expository Commentary: 1 Peter</title>
    <link href="../styles/mywsb-dev.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body epub:type="bodymatter">
    <section epub:type="chapter">

        <h1>6. Christian Identity</h1>
        <p class="center" style="font-family:NuptialScript;font-size:2em;margin-bottom:2em">1 Peter 2:4–10</p>
        <p class="center" style="margin:0 3em 3em 3em"><span class="mini"> In Scripture it says: “See, I lay a stone in Zion, a chosen and precious cornerstone, and the one who trusts in him will never be put to shame.” Now to you who believe, this stone is precious. But to those who do not believe, “The stone the builders rejected has become the capstone.”</span> (1 Peter 2:6–7)</p>
        <p style="text-indent:0"><span class="dcap bgcolor">S</span>omeone<span/>once said that we should be careful how we finish sentences that start with “I am.” We should never say, “I am a loser,” because we should not define ourselves by our weaknesses. Nor<span/>should we say, “I am a powerful executive,” because we should not establish our identity through our achievements. Someone will ask, “If I can’t define myself by my strengths and weaknesses, what’s left?” If we pause, we see that we should not define ourselves by our skills and powers because they readily change. Still the question remains: how should we define ourselves?</p>

        <h2>Identity and Community</h2>
        <p>In the West, self-definition typically begins with <span class="mini">I</span>-statements. But in some cultures, it starts with <span class="mini">we</span>-statements that establish a person’s town, <span>family, and guild. We notice that Israelites defined Jesus as “Joseph’s son” and “the carpenter’s son” in Luke 4:22 and Matthew 13:55. First Peter 2:4–10 moves from the character of Christ to the identity of the believer. For Peter, identity begins with such questions as: “Who is my God? Whom do I trust? What is my community?” The question “Whose am I?” has more weight than “Who am I?” First Peter 2:4–10 says that our faith defines us. Because Jesus is God’s foundation stone, we are living stones. Because he chose us, we are a chosen race. </span></p>
        <p>Since 1 Peter 2:4–10 is a pivotal passage in the epistle, we need to place it in context. God’s elect are “strangers in the world” (1:1). God the Father chose us (1:1–2), Jesus redeemed us from our “empty way of life” (1:18–19), and the Spirit sanctified us (1:2). Therefore, we have an inheritance in heaven, safeguarded by God himself. By faith we receive God’s salvation, and our holy Father summons us to stop conforming to “the evil desires” we followed when we were pagans (1:12–16). Instead, we should be holy as God is holy (1:16) and live “in reverent fear” (1:17–19). Holiness entails a new way of life, especially for Gentiles, once so far from God and now his people (2:4–10).</p>
        <p>The first section of 1 Peter, from 1:1 to 2:12, both opens and closes by describing the identity of believers. We are “God’s elect,” his chosen ones. As a result, we are “strangers in the world” (1:1), no longer at home in our culture (2:10–11). Because we follow Jesus and have withdrawn from our former way of life, we are reviled as evildoers (2:12), so that the label <span class="mini">Christian</span> is almost a curse (4:16).</p>
        <p>First Peter 1:1–21 establishes the theological foundation for the entire epistle. It says that God is holy and has made his elect holy <span class="mini">judicially</span>by covering their sins with the blood of Christ (1:2, 15–19). He also makes the church holy <span class="mini">morally</span> by “the sanctifying work of the Spirit” (1:2). When Peter describes the shape of holiness, Christian community is prominent. Once we have purified ourselves by “obeying the truth”—the gospel—we have a “sincere love for [our] brothers” and therefore “love one other deeply, from the heart (1:22).<sup>1</sup></p>
        <p>Peter then warns us to shun a series of vices. Like many other New Testament vice lists, his looks random at first, but careful reading reveals that each vice destroys community. “Therefore, rid yourselves of all malice and <span>all deceit, hypocrisy, envy, and slander of every kind” (1 Peter 2:1). Later, Peter extols community-building virtues such as compassion, tenderness, humility, and hospitality (3:8; 4:9). Our passage, 2:4–10, describes the basis for Christian community. </span></p>

        <h2>A Living Stone</h2>
        <p>In 1 Peter 2:4–10, the apostle calls his churches a “chosen people, . . . the people of God,” and imputes to them the status of a new Israel. Throughout, <span class="mini">Peter assumes that to come to Christ is to come into this community</span>: “As you come to him, the living Stone—rejected by men but chosen by God and precious to him—you also, like living stones, are being built into a spiritual house to be a holy priesthood, offering spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ” (2:4–5). According to Peter, all that we are rests on all that Jesus is.</p>
        <ul>
          <li>If we come to Christ, the living stone, we become living stones (2:4–5).</li>
          <li>Jesus is the cornerstone (2:6), and God builds us into “a spiritual house” that rests on him (2:5).</li>
          <li>Because Jesus is the Chosen One (2:4), we are God’s chosen ones (2:9).<sup>2</sup> </li>
        </ul>
        <p>Some theologians speak of the elect as individuals, but Scripture typically calls Israel “the elect” or “chosen” of God.<sup>3</sup> Isaiah says that the Servant of the Lord, the Messiah, is <span class="mini">the</span> Chosen One, in whom and by whom all others are chosen (Isa. 42:1; 49:7). At the transfiguration, the climactic revelation of Jesus’ glory, the Father declares, “This is my Son, my Chosen One” (Luke 9:35 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>), a truth that Israel’s rulers mocked at the crucifixion (23:35).</p>
        <p>In 1 Peter 2, the descriptions of Jesus are singular and the descriptions of his people are plural. From this we learn that following Christ entails joining his community, the church. “To accept the Redeemer means also accepting the people whom he has redeemed.”<sup>4</sup>The freelance Christian, who follows Jesus but is too good, too busy, or too self-sufficient for the <span>church, is a walking contradiction. In the old covenant, God set his people apart <span class="mini">from</span> the nations. In the new covenant, he sets us apart as we live <span class="mini">among</span> the nations. But all of Scripture testifies that believers cannot be godly or fruitful without joining God’s family and realizing some form of separation from the world.</span></p>
        <p>Above all, the church is <span class="mini">Christ’s</span> community. Peter begins: “you come to <span class="mini">him</span>” (1 Peter 2:4). Apart from Jesus, there are religious and moral communities, but the church is the one community centered on Jesus rather than morality or spirituality. In both Psalm 118 and Isaiah 28, God declares that he will lay down a foundation stone and build on it (1 Peter 2:6–7 quotes verses from both texts).</p>
        <p>Jesus claimed to be this foundation stone in his climactic conflict with the chief priests, elders, and Pharisees. Jesus compared them to tenants who take a well-prepared vineyard, but refuse to deliver the owner’s share of the crop to him. They expand their rebellion when they mistreat the master’s servants and then kill his only son, hoping to seize the inheritance (Matt. 21:12–46). As Jesus explains the parable, he quotes Psalm 118:22–23: “The stone the builders rejected has become the capstone; the Lord has done this, and it is marvelous in our eyes” (Matt. 21:42).</p>
        <p>The imagery evokes a specific scene. Before erecting a building, stonemasons search piles of rocks for boulders with the size and shape to become foundation stones, cornerstones, and capstones. Jesus depicts them as discarding one after another. They finally see the perfect stone, which represents the Messiah. But when they examine it, they reject it, too. So Israel’s putative leaders searched for their Messiah, but when they found him, they judged him a false prophet (or worse) and killed him. Peter heard Jesus’ teaching; he remembered and found additional “stone” sayings.<sup>5</sup> In Isaiah 28:16, quoted in 1 Peter 2:6, God declares, “See, I lay a stone in Zion, a chosen and precious cornerstone.”</p>
        <p>Peter twice refers to Jesus as being chosen and precious, highly valued, or honored (“precious” was a sound translation, until it began to imply weakness).<sup>6</sup> When we come to this living stone, we become living stones, incorporated into God’s “spiritual house.”</p>
        <p>Peter’s teaching also has roots in the Gospels, where Peter confesses to Jesus, “You are the Christ, the Son of the living God” (Matt. 16:16). Jesus replies, “I tell you that you are <span class="mini">Peter</span>, and on this <span class="mini">rock</span> I will build my church.” This line contains a play on words (16:18). The name <span class="mini">Peter</span> means “rock” or “rocky” in Greek. Jesus makes subtle use of this, for when he continues, he uses a slightly different word when he says that “on this rock I will build my church.” The Greek (transliterated) reads, “You are Peter [<span class="mini">petros</span>], and on this rock [<span class="mini">petra</span>] I will build my church” (<span class="mini">petros</span> and <span class="mini">petra</span> have nearly the same sense, roughly like <span class="mini">rock</span> and <span class="mini">stone</span>).</p>
        <p>We wonder what Jesus means by this small shift. In a sense, Peter is the rock of the church, and yet not quite. Observe that Jesus did not tell Peter, “<span class="mini">On you</span> I will build my church,” but “<span class="mini">on this rock</span> I will build . . . .” If Jesus had wanted to refer to Peter, who is standing right there, there would have been a less convoluted way to do it.<sup>7</sup> We conclude, therefore, that Peter is not, <span class="mini">in himself</span>, the rock of the church. Instead, Scripture says that <span class="mini">Jesus</span> is the church’s cornerstone and foundation. Thus, when Peter confesses Jesus, he continues to build a foundation that has Jesus himself as the chief cornerstone (Eph. 2:19–20; Matt. 21:42; cf. Matt. 18:18). Peter himself is not the rock, because he is too unstable. Indeed, a few minutes later, Peter rebuked Jesus and told him that he must never go to the cross. Later, he denied Jesus three times. Later still, his bout of legalism, mixed with fear, caused a crisis in the Galatian church (Gal. 2). A church built on Peter would be shaky indeed. But Peter did have a pivotal role as the spokesman for the apostles. He testified to Jesus in Matthew 16, then at Pentecost, and then in other moments in the life of the church.</p>
        <p>So Peter’s status depends on what he says. When he forbids Jesus to go to the cross, he is a stumbling stone, but when Peter, eyewitness and apostle, proclaims that Jesus is Christ the Savior and Son of God, he is a rock. His confession is foundational for the church. When pastors proclaim the apostolic message, they build on Jesus, the prophets, and the apostles. If anyone hears this testimony and believes, he or she becomes a living stone, part of a living temple. Yet we are more than <span>a temple; we are also “a holy priesthood, offering spiritual sacrifices” (1 Peter 2:5). </span></p>
        <p>In the Old Testament, the break between priests and people was sharp. God had set apart the priests to offer sacrifices and forgiveness, to pray for the people, and to instruct them in his truth (Jer. 37:3; Mal. 2:7; Heb. 5:1–5). But now we are all priests (cf. Rev. 5:10). We all pray and ask forgiveness. We have access to God, without intermediaries or permission slips (Rom. 5:2). We can understand God’s Word because we know God and he leads us into all truth (Jer. 31:33–34; 1 John 2:27).</p>
        <p>As priests, we offer “spiritual sacrifices” that are “acceptable to God through Jesus Christ” (1 Peter 2:5) As we know, God accepts perfect sacrifices, and ours are flawed; therefore, we offer them through Christ, who forgives and perfects them.</p>
        <p>Still, Scripture suggests how our sacrifices can approach his standard. Peter has already defined holiness as a way of life, not a series of singular events (1 Peter 1:15–16). Long ago, Asaph and David called prayer, thanksgiving, and a repentant heart a sacrifice (Ps. 50:14, 23; 51:17). Paul calls the dedication of mind and body a “living sacrifice” (Rom. 12:1). In Peter, spiritual sacrifices are first “something offered up to God as worship . . . and, second, a pattern of social conduct.” The worship always precedes conduct.<sup>8</sup>So Peter’s sacrifices are the daily devotion of obedience and praise to God, as well as “practical ministry to the needs of men (Heb. 13:15–16).”<sup>9</sup></p>

        <h2>A Message That Divides</h2>
        <p>As Peter said, Jesus is God’s chosen stone, set in Zion, so that “the one who trusts in him will never be put to shame” (1 Peter 2:6b). This is an eschatological promise. Because of our union with Jesus, believers can recapitulate his life pattern. We may, like Jesus, endure rejection and shame, although God won’t let that last. God proclaims, “Those who honor me I will honor, but those who despise me will be disdained” (1 Sam. 2:30). Peter applies this to Jesus. He identifies Jesus as God’s chosen and honorable cornerstone, and states that we must respond to him correctly:</p>
        <p class="blockquote"> Now to you who believe, this stone is precious. But to those who do not believe,</p>
        <p class="blockquote">“The stone the builders rejected <br/><span style="margin-left:2.25em"/>has become the capstone,”</p>
        <p class="blockquote">and,</p>
        <p class="blockquote">“A stone that causes men to stumble <br/><span style="margin-left:2.25em"/>and a rock that makes them fall.” (1 Peter 2:7–8)</p>
        <p>Jesus is the cornerstone of God’s work on earth, but humans may either trust or reject him. If we trust him, we will share in his honor and never bear lasting shame. In Jesus’ day, many rejected him. Today, both the religious and the godless do the same because he fails to meet their criteria: he is too harsh, too demanding, too supernatural. But those who reject him will fall (1 Peter 2:8). Jesus says that when they stumble over him, he falls on them and crushes them (Matt. 21:44).</p>
        <p>Of course, all believers stumble momentarily. John the Baptist and the Twelve faltered when Jesus’ life took unexpected turns (e.g., Matt. 11:2–3; 26:56). But we do not stumble <span class="mini">so as to fall</span>. The Lord steadies us (Ps. 37:24). Indeed, Peter warns his people of impending trouble, so that they will not be surprised and falter. In democratic lands and in nations with a Christian heritage, tolerance and pluralism are widespread, so it is safe to be a Christian. But cultures change, and subcultures (e.g., research universities) can have their own spirit. We should be prepared to suffer rejection and shame with Christ if the day demands it.</p>
        <p>If we are unprepared, we may falter, as the disciples did at Jesus’ arrest. But those who permanently reject the gospel fall permanently, “which is also what they were destined for,” Peter concludes (1 Peter 2:8b). Jesus states that people reject his kingdom for several reasons, such as satanic activity, distraction, self-righteousness, and blindness. The decision is theirs, yet God’s sovereign hand stands behind all (Matt. 13:1–16; 23:13–28).</p>
        <p>Some say that the idea that some were “destined” to fall gives us an unjust God. Paul addresses this charge in Romans 9. Drawing on Genesis and Exodus, he relates that God told Moses, “I will have mercy on whom I have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I have compassion” <span>(Rom. 9:14–15). Mercy is God’s gift. He does extend his favor to one (Jacob) over another (Esau). But the accusation of injustice rests on a false definition. </span></p>
        <p>God always gives everyone <span class="mini">what he or she deserves</span> in the sense that he never punishes the innocent. He is perfectly fair in his <span class="mini">retributive justice</span>. It is true that he does not treat everyone the same way by giving identical gifts to all. Some are born strong, intelligent, or beautiful; others are not. Some have loving parents; others do not. Still, the Lord <span class="mini">never gives anyone less</span> than he or she deserves.</p>
        <p>Suppose a teacher gives a fair but difficult test in mathematics. Out of fifty students, none pass the test. The teacher <span class="mini">could</span> give everyone the grade that he or she earns. Or he could give everyone a low but passing grade. Again, he could give a high grade to <span class="mini">some</span> students as he wished, perhaps favoring the poor or the hardworking. If he let the other students keep the grades they earned, there is no injustice. Everyone received what he or she earned; some received more. The term for that concept is <span class="mini">mercy</span>, not <span class="mini">injustice</span>.</p>
        <p>In election, God does something like the math teacher. Humanity stands before God like a class of failing students. Not one is righteous. Not one seeks God. But God sends his Spirit to the elect, regenerates them, convicts them of sin, and leads them to Jesus. Westminster Confession of Faith 3.5 explains that God, according to his eternal purpose and good pleasure, predestines some to life. He does this by his free grace, not even because he foresees our faith or good works.</p>
        <p>When God sees sinners such as Jacob and Esau, neither deserves his favor. Neither seeks God. If God lets one (Esau) go his way and pursues the other for salvation (Jacob), he has shown mercy to the latter, but has done no injustice to the former. God is never unjust. Indeed, his person defines justice. If we say, “I want justice,” we ask for condemnation. His mercy is our sole hope. Further, anyone who knows enough to debate the question of God’s justice in salvation has heard the gospel promise and should call on Christ, for “everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved” (Rom. 10:13), and no one who trusts in him will be put to shame (10:11; cf. 1 Peter 2:6).</p>

        <h2>A People for God</h2>
        <p>We have seen that 1 Peter 2:4–10 shows how the identity of Christ establishes the identity of believers. But two of Peter’s statements press deeper <span>into the Christian’s identity. Because Jesus chose us, Peter informs us, “You are a chosen people, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people belonging to God” (2:9a). </span></p>
        <p>These honorary titles come from Exodus 19, when God constituted Israel as a nation, and Isaiah 43, when God promised to reestablish Israel after the exile. These are foundational statements about Israel. By applying them to his church, Peter tells Gentiles that the privileges of Israel are now theirs. They may be aliens and exiles, cast out and rejected by their former people, but God has taken them in. They are “a chosen people” (1 Peter 2:9). The phrase “a chosen people,” derived from Isaiah 43:20, also takes us to 1 Peter 2:4 and 2:6. As God chose Jesus, now he has chosen us. All of God’s people, whether Jew or Gentile, are one community by faith.</p>
        <p>The phrase “a royal priesthood” may well be translated as “the king’s priesthood.” We are priests (1 Peter 2:5) who belong to the King and therefore share in Jesus’ sovereign rule. We stand before God in strength as we serve and represent him.</p>
        <p>God called Israel his “holy nation” in Exodus 19:6, since he had consecrated Israel for a life with him. He ordered <span class="mini">physical</span>distinctives in food, clothing, and circumcision. These indicated and promoted Israel’s <span class="mini">spiritual</span> distinctives. Israelite culture was not totally different, but it was appreciably different, and that helped to set the “holy nation” apart from “the nations,” that is, the pagan world.<sup>10</sup></p>
        <p>Peter also called the church “a people belonging to God” (1 Peter 2:9). The Greek is literally “a people for possession.” The phrase is from Isaiah 43:21, where God calls Israel “my chosen people, the people whom I formed for myself ” (<span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). <span class="mini">People</span> is almost a technical term for Israel in its dedication to God. This “possession” is more than mere ownership. God possesses his people because he redeemed them. He exhorts them, “Fear not, for I have redeemed you; I have called you by name; you are mine” (Isa. 43:1).</p>
        <p>The privileged <span class="mini">state</span> of God’s people leads to privileged <span class="mini">action</span>. Because God has redeemed us and we are his, we are heralds who “declare the praises of him who called [us] out of darkness into his wonderful light” (1 Peter 2:9b).</p>
        <p>It is striking that Peter calls Gentile converts a “people” and a “holy nation.” These were labels that had <span class="mini">distinguished Israel from</span>the Gentiles. <span>Now Peter applies the same labels <span class="mini">to</span> the Gentiles. They had practiced a pagan polytheism that Peter calls “the empty way of life handed down to you from your forefathers.” For them, debauchery, carousing, and idolatry were so common that it seemed strange when anyone departed from them (1 Peter 1:18; 4:3–4). But things have changed: “Once you were not a people, but now you are the people of God; once you had not received mercy, but now you have received mercy” (2:10). Let the contrasts resonate: once darkness, now light; once alone, now in God’s family; once awaiting judgment, now receiving mercy.>></span></p>
        <p>We see that 1 Peter 2:4–10 is filled with quotations and allusions to the Old Testament. This shows that Peter assumes that his people, former polytheists and largely illiterate, will know key Old Testament terms and promises. It is now <span class="mini">their</span> book, their story and rule. Since no ordinary person in that day could dream of owning a copy of Scripture, this knowledge came in one way: by coming to church and listening as leaders read the Law and the Prophets. If Peter expected his new converts to gain this knowledge of Scripture, how much more should we lay hold of it. Many of us grew up in the faith, and many of us swim in a sea of Bibles and aids to its understanding. Let us therefore read, use the resources that enhance understanding, and apply what we learn to ourselves.</p>

        <h2>The Question of Identity</h2>
        <p>In other times and cultures, questions of identity did not have the urgency, the need for regular review, that many experience today. At one time, a man or woman belonged to a certain city and family, a certain social group and guild. Today, most of us live far from our hometowns and families. At one time, roles and livelihoods were set from birth or adolescence. Today, we have multiple jobs, even multiple careers. All of this erodes confidence in our identity.</p>
        <p>In Western nations, the educated live in a meritocracy, so that our identity and our achievements are confused with one another. We define others—and let others define us—by our strengths, weaknesses, and accomplishments. So we live with the pressure to perform. We are measured and measure ourselves by this, even though so much rests on forces far outside our control. Immigration patterns raise or lower wages. The careless acts of distant financiers <span>and governments create environments where profits come easily one year and disappear the next. What happens then, if our earnings and titles define us? </span></p>
        <p>In Peter’s day, identity came from externals: town, occupation, lineage, and gender. That is more stable, but not necessarily better, than our way. It was especially painful for Gentile converts who were reviled for leaving old customs and associations; they lost much of their identity.<sup>11</sup> Further, in following Jesus, the Gentiles chose a leader of dubious paternity from an impoverished city. He was a landless artisan and untrained itinerant preacher who died by public execution.</p>
        <p>But the Father reversed all that and crowned Jesus with honor by raising him from death. Now, Peter says, those who follow Jesus receive his honor.<sup>12</sup></p>
        <br/>
        <table>
          <tbody>
            <tr>
              <th>The traits of Jesus (1 Peter 2:4, 6)</th>
              <th>The traits of Jesus’ followers (1 Peter 2:5–12)</th>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>A living stone</td>
              <td>Living stones (2:5)</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>Rejected by humans</td>
              <td>Exiles, aliens (2:11)</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>In God’s eyes, chosen and elect</td>
              <td>In God’s eyes, chosen and elect (2:9)</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>In God’s eyes, valued, honored</td>
              <td>In God’s eyes, royal, beloved (2:9, 11)</td>
            </tr>
          </tbody>
        </table>
        <p class="caption">Table 6.1 Traits of Jesus and his followers</p>
        <p>I write during a season of economic turmoil, when so many individuals have lost their jobs and seen the value of homes and investments plummet. It is tempting to feel rejected, ashamed, even worthless. Some Christians even say things such as “I’ve lost half my net worth.” Nonsense! Financial reversals cannot deprive us of a scintilla of our worth. Our financial assets fluctuate, but our real worth never changes. If we build on Christ, our worth cannot change, since it rests on his unchanging honor, imputed to us.</p>
        <p>It is foolish to find our identity in uncertain things such as wealth. Rather, as Paul directs, “If we have food and clothing, we will be content with that” (1 Tim. 6:8). If we get away from the city, from the advertisements and the crowds, and walk in the wilderness for a day, it’s easy to see. Warm, dry clothes, water, a sandwich, and an apple are enough.</p>
        <p>I once received a promotion to a position that some Christians consider prestigious. A fine Christian man thrust his hand into mine and said, “Congratulations; now you are an important person.” I understood his motive and sentiment, but he was wrong. Because we belong to Jesus, we are important whether we have a title or not.</p>
        <p>John Calvin wisely observed that we are most teachable when most miserable, for “our ruin compels us to look upward” to God. Further, “our very poverty better discloses the infinite benefits of reposing in God.” We know ourselves and our worth when we look into God’s face.<sup>13</sup> A disciple’s identity begins with Jesus. God has chosen Christ, valued and loved him eternally for his person and his work. Faith unites us to him, so God treasures and loves us as his restored people.</p>
        <p>It is Peter’s style to move constantly from indicatives to imperatives, from God’s actions to our response. If we review the commands of 1 Peter 1–2, we see that they address our attitudes more than our behavior:</p>
        <ul>
          <li>Because we are redeemed, we should “hope fully on the grace to be given you when Jesus Christ is revealed” (1 Peter 1:13).</li>
          <li>Because God judges everyone impartially and redeemed us with Jesus’ blood, we should live “in reverent fear” of displeasing him (1:17–19).</li>
          <li>Because we have been born again by God’s Word, we “crave pure spiritual milk,” God’s truth, which stands forever (1:24–2:2).</li>
        </ul>
        <p>Our passage adds that Jesus is the cornerstone, rejected by men, but honored by God. When we trust him, we share his honor and join his family. That is where we must find our identity. Let us define ourselves as God does. It is more true and secure, and it liberates us from self-inflicted shame. Let us remember, finally, that each calling and privilege comes from faith in Christ. We are God’s chosen ones, living temples, royal priests because he is all these things first. He is God’s elect, the Priest “who combines in His person royalty and priesthood.”<sup>14</sup> All his privileges become ours as our faith unites us to him.</p>
        <div class="reference">
          <hr style="margin-top:1.5em"/>
          <p class="footnote">1. Scot McKnight, <span class="mini">1 Peter</span>, <span class="smallcaps">NIV</span> Application Commentary (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1996), 84–85.</p>
          <p class="footnote">2. The Greek is <span class="mini">eklektos</span>, meaning “elect” or “chosen,” in 1 Peter 1:1; 2:4; 2:9.</p>
          <p class="footnote">3. The Old Testament occasionally regards individuals such as David and Solomon as God’s elect, but that is the exception, not the rule.</p>
          <p class="footnote">4. C. E. B. Cranfield, <span class="mini">I & II Peter and Jude</span> (London: SCM Press, 1960), 62–63.</p>
          <p class="footnote">5. See Acts 1:15–20 for an early instance of Peter’s searching Scripture to good effect.</p>
          <p class="footnote">6. The Greek adjective <span class="mini">entimos</span> is traditionally translated “precious,” that is, “of great price or value.” But “highly valued,” “honorable,” or “distinguished” is a better translation, since “precious” <span>often means “cute,” pejoratively, in recent use. For uses of the Greek, see Luke 7:2; 14:8; Phil. 2:29. </span></p>
          <p class="footnote">7. Alan McNeile, <span class="mini">The Gospel according to St. Matthew</span> (London: Macmillan, 1915; repr., Grand Rapids: Baker, 1980), 151.</p>
          <p class="footnote">8. J. Ramsey Michaels, <span class="mini">1 Peter</span>, Word Biblical Commentary 49 (Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 1988), 101.</p>
          <p class="footnote">9. Alan M. Stibbs, <span class="mini">The First Epistle General of Peter</span> (London: Tyndale, 1959), 100.</p>
          <p class="footnote">10. See Christopher J. H. Wright, <span class="mini">Old Testament Ethics for the People of God</span> (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2004).</p>
          <p class="footnote">11. Joel B. Green, <span class="mini">1 Peter</span> (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2007), 56–58.</p>
          <p class="footnote">12. Adapted from ibid., 59–60.</p>
          <p class="footnote">13. John Calvin, <span class="mini">Institutes of the Christian Religion</span>, trans. Ford Lewis Battles (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1960), 1.1–2.</p>
          <p class="footnote">14. Stibbs, <span class="mini">First Epistle General of Peter</span>, 105.</p>
        </div>

    </section>
  </body>
</html>
