<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <title>Reformed Expository Commentary: 1 Peter</title>
    <link href="../styles/mywsb-dev.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body epub:type="bodymatter">
    <section epub:type="chapter">

        <h1>15. God’s Way to Endure Trials</h1>
        <p class="h1sub">1 Peter 4:12–19</p>
        <p class="center" style="margin:0 3em 3em 3em"><span class="mini"> Dear friends, do not be surprised at the painful trial you are suffering, as though something strange were happening to you. But rejoice that you participate in the sufferings of Christ, so that you may be overjoyed when his glory is revealed</span>. (1 Peter 4:12–13)</p>
        <p style="text-indent:0"><span class="dcap bgcolor">F</span>rom the beginning of his epistle, Peter has told the disciples in his churches that they are strangers, outsiders, and aliens in this age. At best, he says, believers can live an exemplary<span/>life, so that their good deeds will silence false accusations (1 Peter 1:2; 2:12). The themes of alienation, suffering, and persecution never seem far away in 1 Peter. Each section contributes something to the apostle’s teaching on suffering and injustice. First Peter 2:18–23 tells disciples to bear mistreatment patiently and to entrust themselves to God, the Judge. We must never return evil for evil. If we must suffer, we should suffer for doing what is right.</p>

        <h2>A Final Word on Persecution</h2>
        <p>But 1 Peter 3 begins a more sustained and challenging discussion of the topic as the apostle warns his people to prepare to “suffer for what is right” <span>and to “suffer for doing good” (3:14, 17). He begins by asking, “Who is going to harm you if you are eager to do good?” (3:13). In the Greek, the question is phrased to invite the answer: “No one.” Yet, he says, you <span class="mini">might</span>suffer because you are good: “But even if you should suffer for what is right, you are blessed” (3:14). The Greek verbs in 3:13 and 3:17 use the rare optative mood, a verb form typically used for remote or theoretical possibilities. Ordinarily, Peter says, no one will harm you “if you are eager to do good.” Nonetheless, he implies, it could happen, and believers should be prepared.</span></p>
        <p>Perhaps Peter meant to ease his churches into the hard truth, or perhaps, as some scholars speculate, Peter received bad news even as he wrote. Whatever the reason, Peter’s tone shifts in chapter 4. Suffering was a possibility; now he urges his readers to expect trouble.<sup>1</sup> In 1 Peter 3:13–17, Peter tells us that persecution will possibly happen and that disciples must be prepared if it does. In 4:12 he says, “Do not be surprised at the painful trial you are suffering.” The Greek verb (<span class="mini">xenizesthe</span>) is a present imperative, which suggests that they <span class="mini">are</span> surprised by this development and should not be.</p>
        <p>First Peter 4:12–19 is Peter’s final word on suffering and persecution. The apostle makes six points. First, the disciples in the church should not be surprised by fiery trials (4:12). Second, they should rejoice, for they share in the sufferings of Christ (4:13). Third, no one should suffer <span class="mini">deservedly</span>—as a murderer, thief, or even a meddler (4:15). Fourth, no one should be ashamed to “suffer as a Christian.” Rather, we should praise God that we bear the name of Christ (4:16). Fifth, we should be prepared to meet the Lord (4:17–18). Sixth, those who do suffer should entrust themselves to their faithful God (4:19). We will consider these commands one by one.</p>

        <h2>Don’t Be Surprised at Trials</h2>
        <p>Peter opens starkly: “Do not be surprised at the painful trial you are suffering, as though something strange were happening to you” (1 Peter 4:12). “Do not be surprised,” Peter says, because trials are not strange. Peter predicts them. Jesus also told his disciples to expect them: “In this <span> world you will have trouble” (John 16:33b). Happily, Jesus also encourages: “Take heart! I have overcome the world” (16:33c).</span></p>
        <p>Further, in God’s economy, the <span class="mini">result</span> of trials is positive. When we endure persecution, it demonstrates that we belong to God, our King. Jesus said, “Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness’ sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven” (Matt. 5:10 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). Persecution proves that we are united to Christ: “Rejoice that you participate in the sufferings of Christ.” For that reason we have a reward in heaven “when his glory is revealed” (1 Peter 4:13; cf. Matt. 5:12). If Jesus suffers hostility, we should expect to follow our Master’s path (Matt. 10:24–25).</p>
        <p>First Peter 4:12–19 marks the third time that Peter told believers that they must endure suffering. The leaders of the Roman Empire were not necessarily hostile to religious divergence, but new religions, exclusive religions, and rapidly growing religions were viewed less favorably. The apostle warns of trouble because he sees it coming and wants to shepherd his people. If they are prepared for adversity, they can endure, possibly even thrive. As we read Peter, we hear an urgent personal word. He wants to warn his “dear friends” of an imminent danger (4:12).</p>
        <p>Since Western Christians generally live in times of relative ease, we might feel that Peter’s warnings have no purchase here. Western believers might face mild mockery or dismissive remarks. Our arguments might not be taken seriously and our campus ministries might lose the right to meet on campus while the gay-lesbian-transgender-bisexual club doesn't, but this is marginalization, not red-blooded persecution. Of course, there is no guarantee that this peace will last. Still, we don’t feel the need for counsel about trials and suffering in easier days. Whatever hostility Western believers endure, as I write, it barely compares to the troubles of believers in Rome in Peter’s day.</p>
        <p>Let us remember how many believers in Asia and Africa suffer for the cause of Christ every day. A friend of mine helps to lead a Christian training center for exiled Eritreans living in Sudan, one of the most oppressive nations on earth. In vast areas of Sudan, a family can be in mortal danger simply for being Christians. Nonetheless, life in Eritrea is so much worse that Eritrean Christians flee to Sudan for refuge. The number of Christian leaders who are imprisoned and martyred for the faith has never been higher than it is today.</p>
        <p>Although Western Christians face no direct persecution as I write, we never know when the situation might change. Apart from that, every nation experiences times of war, economic distress, and upheaval, so we can identify with the problem of suffering. When our jobs disappear and savings dwindle, not because of dereliction or sin, but because of the mistakes of powerful people in distant places, we feel some of the sting of persecution. Whenever we suffer for actions beyond our control, we taste the life of the first Christians, who suffered even if they did no wrong. They suffered because they did something right; they repented of the follies of pagan polytheism. So even if our experience is far from Peter’s, we can hear his message for those who suffer unjustly.</p>
        <p>“Do not be surprised at the painful trial you are suffering, as though something strange were happening to you” (1 Peter 4:12). This world is full of tribulation of many kinds, and it strikes for many reasons. First, we suffer because we live in a fallen world. We taste pain and brokenness even when no human does evil. Flocks of birds strike planes so that they crash. We battle illness, disease, storms, and floods. Sadly, humanity sometimes compounds these ordinary disasters. We mismanage lands and rivers so that heavy rains become floods. War can multiply the effects of a light harvest so that it becomes famine.</p>
        <p>Second, we suffer because we are united to evil men. We endure leaders, teachers, and coaches who, at one end of the spectrum, are careless, lazy, or unfair. At the other end, some are malicious, oppressive, and abusive. Heedless political leaders and generals start pointless wars and the foot soldiers die, leaving widows and orphans in their wake. Family members and so-called friends say and do cruel things.</p>
        <p>Third, we suffer because of our own sins. According to Proverbs 5:22, “the evil deeds of a wicked man ensnare him; the cords of his sin hold him fast.” We suffer when friends break their promises, but when we break promises, we suffer, too—the decay of a relationship.</p>
        <p>First Peter 4 addresses the worst evil: deliberate malice. A few try to harm Christians because they are hostile to the faith. Others seize the opportunity to rob or crush the weak, and if Christians happen to be weak, predators will attack the same way they would attack any other defenseless minority.</p>
        <p>Whether we suffer true persecution or for another reason, everyone needs Peter’s message about suffering. Therefore, as long as we live in this fallen <span>world, this magnificent ruin, we should expect to suffer. It is neither strange nor surprising. The more we expect trouble, the better we will be prepared for it. </span></p>
        <p>We should be prepared because suffering is a “fiery ordeal” or “fiery trial” (1 Peter 4:12 <span class="smallcaps">NASB</span>, <span class="smallcaps">NRSV</span>, <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). The event tries or tests us. The phrase <span class="mini">fiery trial</span>is from Proverbs 27:21 (<span class="smallcaps">LXX</span>), which reads, “A man is tested [or <span class="mini">judged</span>] by his praise.” This can mean either the praise we receive—our reputation—or the praise we give, what we choose to praise. Both make sense in context. If we endure trials, we should be praised. And if we praise God during the trial of unjust suffering, then we have surely passed a test of character.<sup>2</sup></p>
        <p>Yet we can see why suffering took Peter’s people by surprise. They had never been cultural outsiders, so they had never faced irrational prejudice. Recently they had turned to God, so they might have expected his favor to lead to an easier life. But when life got harder, they were surprised.</p>
        <p>Langdon Gilkey’s memoir, <span class="mini">Shantung Compound</span>,<sup>3</sup> tells the story of two thousand Europeans and Americans whom the Japanese kept in an internment camp in Shantung for the entire length of World War II. Their imprisonment surprised them because they had committed no crime. They were missionaries, businessmen, travelers, or educators who simply happened to live in north China when the war broke out. We can suffer simply for belonging to the wrong group at the wrong time. It should not surprise us; we should be prepared for it.</p>

        <h2>Rejoice That You Are United to Christ</h2>
        <p>Jesus <span class="mini">predicted</span> that we would face persecution, and he <span class="mini">showed</span> that God’s agents will suffer. As a result, Peter says, disciples should “rejoice that you participate in the sufferings of Christ, so that you may be overjoyed when his glory is revealed” (1 Peter 4:13). Suffering is a product of our union with Christ.</p>
        <p>I once preached a guest sermon in a city known for its rudeness. Afterward, two men surprised me with their comments. One remarked that it was the second-best sermon he’d ever heard (I didn’t ask). The other told me that the message was “a stench in the nostrils of God.” The man seemed <span>arrogant, so I tried to discount it, but it is never easy to be blasted when we do our best to please God and neighbor. </span></p>
        <p>But Peter tells us not to be surprised at trials or rejection. If Jesus, in all his perfection, could be rejected, so will we. If his life followed a pattern of suffering before glory, so will ours, since he expects our life to resemble his (1 Peter 2:23–25; 3:14; 5:1). Indeed, we should rejoice, not in suffering per se, but in the pain that demonstrates our participation in his suffering. So we rejoice if (and only if) we suffer innocently, as he did. Then we will rejoice when Jesus returns, in glory, appearing to all flesh, to judge and renew creation, beginning with this world (4:13).</p>
        <p>Therefore, “if you are insulted [or <span class="mini">reviled</span>] because of the name of Christ, you are blessed, for” it proves that “the Spirit of glory and of God rests on you” (1 Peter 4:14). In a hostile, pagan environment, a reproach can be proof that God’s Spirit shapes us so completely that our life disturbs the pagan, who responds by reviling. Opposition might therefore be proof that God is so differentiating us from the culture that we cannot be ignored.</p>
        <p>Around <span class="smallcaps">A.D.</span> 400, a monk named Telemachus felt God compelling him to travel to Rome to preach against the city’s corruptions, especially against the gladiatorial games. He preached on a street corner, but no one paid him heed. Then came a day for the games. As the crowds bounded to the amphitheater, Telemachus decided to walk with them. He entered, saw, blanched, and acted. He leaped into the arena and shouted to two combatants to cease their bloody contest.</p>
        <p>There are two accounts of what happened next. One says that the combatants briefly stopped fighting each other, killed him, and then resumed their battle. The second reports that the crowd picked up loose stones from the crumbling Colosseum and used them to stone him to death. Either way, his protest so challenged the proceedings that he was slain.</p>
        <p>It <span class="mini">seemed</span> that Telemachus’s protest had failed. But in Matthew 5:10–16, Jesus says that four things can happen when godly character manifests itself. We might be “persecuted because of righteousness” (5:10); we might be “the salt of the earth,” retarding its decay (5:13); we might be “the light of the world,” enlightening all who see it (5:14); and that light might shine so clearly that witnesses “see your good deeds and praise your Father in heaven” (5:16).</p>
        <p>Telemachus was persecuted for righteousness that day, but the story of Telemachus’s protest spread. His “salt and light” strengthened those who <span>protested the games. For centuries, most people had seen the games as a spectacle and entertainment. It took a long time, but eventually, with the help of Telemachus, the world came to view the games as a crime and an abomination. In God’s providence, the prosperity of the empire was crumbling, making it harder for governors to sponsor the contests. By <span class="smallcaps">A.D.</span>450, to God’s glory, they had essentially ceased.<sup>4</sup> </span></p>
        <p>Today, young adults who abstain from sexual encounters before marriage are viewed as antiquarians at best, fools at worst. Why, a highly regarded advice columnist asks reproachfully, would <span class="mini">any</span> couple want to get married without first assuring themselves that they are sexually compatible? We believe that total <span class="mini">physical</span> self-giving belongs in the marital context of total <span class="mini">personal</span> self-giving—heart, soul, body, mind, will, and strength. Outside marriage, sexual intimacy is intrinsically deceptive—a life-uniting act without a life-uniting intent.<sup>5</sup> There will always be areas where Christian ethics so clash with a given culture’s ethic that Christians will endure reproach for following God’s ways.</p>
        <p>It is miserable to endure mockery, scorn, and character assassination, and every sane person recoils from physical persecution. Yet we want to be like Jesus, who loved us and gave himself for us as a sacrifice (Eph. 5:2). He is the supreme case of an innocent man unjustly persecuted. Like Jesus, we neither <span class="mini">seek</span> persecution nor <span class="mini">retreat</span> from it. We accept it if it comes, and when it does come, it proves that we have allied ourselves with the suffering Christ. Paul states, “I want to know Christ and the power of his resurrection and the fellowship of sharing in his sufferings” (Phil. 3:10–11).</p>
        <p>When we belong to Christ, we experience a real union with him. My wife and I have been married for over thirty years. For some years, people have treated us as though we shared each other’s attributes. They pepper her with biblical and theological questions, even though she has no formal training. Even more astonishing, because she is delightfully friendly and remembers everyone’s name, people assume that I’m friendly and remember their names, too. There are good reasons for these assumptions. <span class="mini">We become like the people with whom we are united</span>. Husbands and wives, in real marriages at least, <span>do become similar. Because of our marriage, I am friendlier and my wife knows more theology. </span></p>
        <p>If we are united to Christ, we become more like him. Our life path resembles his more and more. Our suffering recapitulates his suffering. So our suffering shows that we belong to him now and will share in his coming victory. So we will “be overjoyed when his glory is revealed.” If we share in his suffering, we will share in his victory over death and enjoy God’s reward in heaven.</p>
        <p>Peter teaches, “If you are insulted because of the name of Christ, you are blessed, for the Spirit of glory and of God rests on you” (1 Peter 4:14). Jesus likewise told his disciples that they were blessed if they suffered evil “because of righteousness” or “because of me” (Matt. 5:10–11). That is, we are blessed if we suffer for God’s principles, and we are blessed if we suffer for God’s Son.</p>
        <p>Persecution also links us with the prophets, who suffered the same thing. If we suffer for Jesus’ sake, we are in good company. We join the prophets who suffered because they challenged their age. When we engage the world, clashing values inescapably create conflict. When Jeremiah confronted the idolatry and corruption of his age, they called him a traitor, burned his writings, and shut his mouth by tossing him into a pit. Ahead of his time, he participated in the sufferings of Christ. We should expect the same, for “a student is not above his teacher.” If opponents slander the master, they will also slander his followers (Matt. 10:24–25). Jesus doesn’t hide bad news; he repeats it:</p>
        <p class="blockquote">If the world hates you, keep in mind that it hated me first. If you belonged to the world, it would love you as its own. . . . I have chosen you out of the world. That is why the world hates you. Remember the words I spoke to you: “No servant is greater than his master.” If they persecuted me, they will persecute you also. (John 15:18–20)</p>
        <p>The Bible never blesses suffering in itself. No one should take direct pleasure in pain. Threats, insults, and slander hurt, even if the slanderer is a great fool. Nonetheless, Peter insists, “If you are insulted because of the name of Christ, you are blessed, for the Spirit of glory and of God rests on you” (1 Peter 4:14).</p>

        <h2>Never Suffer for Evil Deeds; Avoid Well-Deserved Suffering</h2>
        <p>When the Spirit of glory so rests on us that we become more like Christ, we participate in his life, and insults suffered for the sake of righteousness prove that. But the progress of the disciple is always partial, so that Peter is compelled to add a caveat: “If you suffer, it should not be as a murderer or thief or any other kind of criminal, or even as a meddler” (1 Peter 4:15). Peter requires that we avoid criminal acts meriting punishment. He assumes that we will shun the foolishness that earns us displeasure.</p>
        <p>Refraining from murder also means no displays of anger, no resentment. No harsh judgment—scorning, scoffing, despising, or belittling. Refraining from theft also means no envy or greed, no manipulation or abuse of funds, no unpaid debts, and no waste of wealth or creation.</p>
        <p>It is obvious that disciples should avoid criminal activity, but the ban on meddling is a subtle notion. The term translated “meddler” (<span class="mini">allotri</span><span class="mini">episkopos</span>) is a rare compound word that means “an overseer of another’s affairs.” Meddlers interfere, usurping roles not properly theirs. They might even scheme to gain influence outside their sphere. They nose into matters that are not their proper concern and offer unwanted opinions. They speak when protocol calls for silence. No one gladly listens to a meddler; most are irritated. If a child is misbehaving at the grocery store, how many parents will welcome child-rearing tips from the nearest cashier?</p>
        <p>The Lord disapproves when we violate reasonable social standards. He does not bless tactlessness or folly, even if they are somehow connected to the faith. A worker cannot claim persecution if, while proselytizing a fellow laborer, he talks beyond the lunch hour and is rebuked for it. If we bark out corrections whenever our peers speak crudely, we can expect rejection. Leaders have a right to set standards for their organization, but ordinary employees should keep their judgments private. God does not bless tactless behavior, and it is not persecution when obnoxious acts earn wrath. There is a time for silence, as Solomon declared and as Jesus and Paul showed (Eccl. 3:7; Luke 23:9; John 19:9; Acts 19:30).</p>
        <p>When we receive harsh treatment, we should ask, “What have I done to deserve this?” rather than “Why do they persecute me?” For example, if we freely share pointed opinions in person or in blogs and Internet posts, we should not be <span>surprised if people disagree with us and criticize us. And if the critic’s language is harsh, we should not call it <span class="mini">persecution</span>, but a predictable consequence of sharp debate. On the other hand, both David and Peter say that, ordinarily, we suffer no harm if we do good (1 Peter 3:10–13, quoting Ps. 34:12–16).</span></p>

        <h2>Don’t Be Ashamed to Suffer as a Christian</h2>
        <p>“Yet if anyone suffers as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God in that name” (1 Peter 4:16 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). Translators debate whether the phrase “glorify God in that name” means that we praise God that we bear the name of Christ (<span class="smallcaps">NIV</span>), or that we praise God in the name of Christ (<span class="smallcaps">NASB</span>). A common interpretation takes Peter to say, “Even if the name ‘Christian’ is hurled at you in derision, wear the name proudly, for you do belong to Christ.” In a common variant reading, the text reads “let him glorify God <span class="mini">in this matter</span>,” that is, let him glorify God while it happens.<sup>6</sup> At any rate, it seems that the term <span class="mini">Christian</span> was a slur, an insult, much as certain Englishmen coined the term <span class="mini">Puritan</span> to mock English believers who had a zeal for purity. In each case, believers eventually decided to take the slur as a positive name. If that happens, Peter says, praise God in it. Don’t be ashamed; take your eyes off yourself. In today’s terms:</p>
        <ul>
          <li>If called a <span class="mini">fundamentalist</span>, think, “Yes, I believe the fundamentals.”</li>
          <li>If called a <span class="mini">Bible-thumper</span>, think, “Yes, I do read and honor God’s Word.”</li>
          <li>If called a <span class="mini">Puritan</span>, think, “Yes, I do aim for purity and integrity.”</li>
          <li>If called a <span class="mini">Christian</span>, think, “Yes, I do follow Jesus.”</li>
        </ul>
        <p>In Peter’s day, Christians were exiled, arrested, tried, even slain for their faith. If any believer so suffers, he or she should count it an honor to suffer for Jesus’ name.</p>
        <p>In the West, where religious freedom has long been respected, we might think this discussion pointless. But we should be prepared. In Russia, after the Communist revolution, and in Germany, during the later stages of Nazi <span>rule, it suddenly became dangerous to be an evangelical Christian. Most recently, Christians in Iraq and Sudan, who had been safe minorities for decades, even centuries, suddenly found themselves at risk. The same could happen in many other lands, in time. </span></p>

        <h2>Be Prepared to Meet the Lord</h2>
        <p>Peter says that his people must be ready to live faithfully, for each person must render an account of his or her life before God the Judge: “For it is time for judgment to begin with the family of God; and if it begins with us, what will the outcome be for those who do not obey the gospel of God?” (1 Peter 4:17). Peter has already mentioned judgment several times (1:17; 2:23; 4:5–6). The original says that “it is time for <span class="mini">the</span>judgment,” which can only mean the final judgment. The Old Testament prophets said that this judgment must begin with God’s people (Jer. 25:15–33, noting 25:29; cf. Ezek. 9; Mal. 3).<sup>7</sup></p>
        <p>Peter’s readers might be surprised to hear that believers will face judgment. After all, it is challenging enough to be a Christian. And after suffering for Jesus in this life, we still face judgment. This teaching should neither surprise nor dismay us. First, it is the consistent testimony of Scripture. Jesus said, “When the Son of Man comes in his glory, . . . all the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate the people one from another as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats” (Matt. 25:31–32). The goats are unbelievers; the sheep are believers, to whom he will say, “Come, you who are blessed by my Father; take your inheritance, the kingdom prepared for you since the creation of the world. For I was hungry and you gave me something to eat, I was thirsty and you gave me something to drink, I was a stranger and you invited me in” (25:34–35). The Bible consistently teaches that God will examine us and will do so through our works when we stand before him. We will account for them all on the last day (Ps. 62:12; Jer. 17:10; Matt. 16:27; 2 Cor. 5:10; 1 Peter 1:17; Rev. 20:12).</p>
        <p>But this judgment should not alarm us for a second reason: we will not be condemned. This is not according to works. Our works do count, but they count because they <span class="mini">follow our heart commitments</span>. This is clear in Psalm 62. David declares, “My soul finds rest in God alone . . . . He alone is my rock and <span>my salvation . . . . You, O God, are strong, . . . you, O Lord, are loving. Surely you will reward each person according to what he has done” (Ps. 62:1–2, 11–12). Because David trusts the Lord, he is confident that his life, his works, reflects that trust. He knows the Lord will see his loyalty in his deeds. </span></p>
        <p>The believer’s sins and failings will be forgiven, yet—what a gift—our noble words and deeds will attest our heart commitment to the Lord on judgment day. Deeds supply public, verifiable evidence of the heart’s condition (Matt. 7:17–18; 12:33–35; James 2:14–26). Therefore, we should examine ourselves and ask what our words and deeds reveal. Do they show that Jesus is our King and that his grace and reign have transformed us? Peter directs us to expect that day and prepare for it, living according to our identity as members of “the family of God”—the Father’s sons and daughters.</p>
        <p>Now, Peter continues, if judgment day is a serious matter even for disciples, “what will the outcome be for those who do not obey the gospel of God? And, ‘If it is hard for the righteous to be saved, what will become of the ungodly and the sinner?’ ” (1 Peter 4:17–18). That is, if someone does not love and obey God, it will be clear, and it will lead to judgment. Again, this is not judgment according to works in a narrow sense. Rather, the corrupt heart also proves itself in actions. Jeremiah put it this way: “The heart is deceitful above all things and beyond cure. Who can understand it? I the L<span class="smallcaps">ORD</span> search the heart and examine the mind, to reward a man according to his conduct, according to what his deeds deserve” (Jer. 17:9–10). So the direction of the heart and mind leads to deeds that God rewards or punishes. The priority of the heart’s direction, a person’s faith or the lack of it, is clear in the question that closes 1 Peter 4:17: “What will the outcome be for those who do not obey the gospel of God?” When the phrase “obey the gospel” appears in the Bible, it is clear that to <span class="mini">obey</span> the gospel means to <span class="mini">believe</span> the gospel of Jesus (Rom. 10:14–16; 2 Thess. 1:8–10). Peter is therefore speaking of those who hear and reject the gospel and persecute Christians for the faith (1 Peter 2:8; 3:14–17). If the judgment is a serious thing for “the family of God . . . , what will the outcome be for those who do not obey the gospel of God? And, ‘If it is hard for the righteous to be saved, what will become of the ungodly and the sinner?’ ” (1 Peter 4:17–18). It is hard even for believers to be saved. God must preserve the elect (Matt. 24:22–24). The gate is narrow (Matt. 7:13–14). Our faith is tested and proved genuine (1 Peter 1:6–7; 4:12). We must remember whom to fear (3:14).</p>
        <p> If the believer must be so careful to persevere and stay ready to meet the Judge, even in our union with Christ, what will come to the person who has spurned Christ, oppressed the weak, and lived for himself? We should then be sober-minded and give thanks that we face the judgment vindicated by the good deeds that come from faith.</p>
        <p>Let us therefore be ready for that day. Many call on the Lord, but not all call sincerely (Matt. 7:22). We prepare by praying and telling Jesus, “I sincerely believe in you as you are presented in the gospel. I will fail often, but I do resolve to love, follow, and obey you, even if that should bring me persecution, for I know how you loved me and gave yourself for me.”</p>
        <p>This passage begins and ends with suffering; suffering divides those who truly call on Jesus from those who dabble in religion for a season. Suffering clarifies things. If we endure at a cost, it shows that we know the Lord and are preparing daily to meet him and render an account for our life.</p>

        <h2>Commit Yourself, Therefore, to the Faithful God</h2>
        <p>“So then, those who suffer according to God’s will should commit themselves to their faithful Creator and continue to do good” (1 Peter 4:19). We suffer according to God’s will when we suffer for the sake of righteousness, not our sin or folly. At the same time, we accept that our suffering is his will, his decree, as he continues to govern the world.</p>
        <p>Peter also tells us how to endure suffering. Curiously, he does not command us to be faithful; he reminds us that God is faithful. So we should continually commit or entrust ourselves to the faithful Creator.<sup>8</sup>The word translated “commit” means “to entrust or to hand over something to the care of another.” The “thing” that we commit to God is our very life, and we do so because we believe he is faithful. That is why David told the Lord, “Into your hands I commit my spirit; redeem me, O L<span class="smallcaps">ORD</span>,” and it is why Jesus said the same words even as he died on the cross (Ps. 31:5; cf. Luke 23:46). The command is in the present tense, which means that we continue to<span>commit ourselves to God, knowing that he is faithful. And while we suffer and trust, we do good, as he defines it in Scripture.<sup>9</sup> </span></p>
        <p>There is a time to flee persecution and run to another place, Jesus noted (Matt. 10:23). But while we might run by abandoning our home, we cannot run by abandoning our faith, our vows, or our Lord. Many do abandon their vows. Pastors administer vows fairly often—at weddings and baptisms, to new church members and church officers. A few take their vows in vain and begin to abandon them almost at once. All of us fail partially. But God does not. That is why we entrust ourselves to him instead of entrusting ourselves to ourselves.</p>

        <h2>Summary</h2>
        <p>To review, Peter has suggested some means to remain true during suffering and persecution. First, we must be ready when trials come (1 Peter 4:12). Second, we should rejoice that we are united to Christ (4:13). If we suffer insults, it shows that the Spirit of God rests on us (4:14). Third, we should suffer for the faith, not because we merit punishment (4:15). Fourth, no one should be ashamed to suffer because we bear the name of Christ (4:16). Fifth, we remember that we will stand before God the Judge (4:17–18). Finally, when we suffer, we should commit ourselves to our faithful God and continue to do good (4:19).</p>
        <p>In Psalms 26:1; 35:24; 43:1; and 54:1, the singer pleads, “Vindicate me, O L<span class="smallcaps">ORD</span>.” Psalm 135:14 seems to answer the petitions: “For the L<span class="smallcaps">ORD</span> will vindicate his people.” Jesus is the archetype of the one who is falsely accused and then vindicated by God, above all in his resurrection (1 Tim. 3:16; see also Rom. 1:1–4 [which has the concept, not the word]). Because of our union with Christ (1 Peter 4:13), we will be vindicated with him. Knowing this, we can persevere.</p>
        <p>The sixfold counsel of 1 Peter 4:12–19 deserves our careful attention, but we must remember that the Bible is never essentially about lists of duties. To live by lists is as appealing as cotton candy—and just as nourishing. The Bible starts with the covenants and the character of God. He created us, he redeemed us, and he is worthy of our trust. If Jesus was willing to suffer in the flesh, we should be, too. And if the Father vindicated Jesus by raising him from the dead, he will vindicate us, too. That future, in God’s presence, that future, sharing in his glory, teaches us to persevere.</p>
        <div class="reference">
          <hr style="margin-top:1.5em"/>
          <p class="footnote">1. Commentators speculate that the situation changed for the worse even as Peter wrote, so that his warnings grew more urgent. But there is no external evidence of such a change. It is possible that Peter chose to ease his readers into a difficult discussion.</p>
          <p class="footnote">2. Bruce K. Waltke, <span class="mini">The Book of Proverbs</span> (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2005), 2:387.</p>
          <p class="footnote">3. New York: Harper & Row, 1966.</p>
          <p class="footnote">4. Philip Schaff, <span class="mini">History of the Christian Church</span> (Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 1996), 3:122–25.</p>
          <p class="footnote">5. Lewis B. Smedes, <span class="mini">Sex for Christians: The Limits and Liberties of Sexual Living</span> (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1994), 110–11. See also Timothy Keller, with Kathy Keller, <span class="mini">The Meaning of Marriage: Facing the Complexities of Commitment with the Wisdom of God</span> (New York: Dutton, 2011), 224–27.</p>
          <p class="footnote">6. The chief difference is that the text normally adopted has “name” (<span class="mini">onomati</span>), whereas the common alternative reading has “matter” (<span class="mini">merei</span>). See J. Ramsey Michaels, <span class="mini">1 Peter</span>, Word Biblical Commentary 49 (Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 1988), 269–70.</p>
          <p class="footnote">7. Peter H. Davids, <span class="mini">The First Epistle of Peter</span> (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1990), 170.</p>
          <p class="footnote">8. The Greek is <span class="mini">paratithēmi</span>. The verb is a present imperative, signifying an ongoing disposition. “Ourselves” translates <span class="mini">hē psuchē</span>—literally, “the soul.” This is not meant to contrast with the body. It means the whole person, perhaps with the connotation that persecutors can harm the body but not the whole person. See Matt. 10:28; Davids, <span class="mini">1 Peter</span>, 173; Michaels, <span class="mini">1 Peter</span>, 273.</p>
          <p class="footnote">9. The Greek phrase <span class="mini">en agathopoia</span> could mean “<span class="mini">by</span> doing good” or “<span class="mini">while</span> doing good.” <span class="mini">While</span> fits better, for Peter is urging his readers to continue to do good as they suffer.</p>
        </div>

    </section>
  </body>
</html>
