<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <title>Reformed Expository Commentary: 1 Peter</title>
    <link href="../styles/mywsb-dev.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body epub:type="bodymatter">
    <section epub:type="chapter">

        <h1>12. The Work of the Living Christ</h1>
        <p class="center" style="font-family:NuptialScript;font-size:2em;margin-bottom:2em">1 Peter 3:18–22</p>
        <p class="center" style="margin:0 3em 3em 3em"><span class="mini"> For Christ died for sins once for all, the righteous for the unrighteous, to bring you to God. He was put to death in the body but made alive by the Spirit, through whom also he went and preached to the spirits in prison who disobeyed long ago</span>. (1 Peter 3:18–20a)</p>

        <h2>The Challenge of Understanding Our Passage</h2>
        <p>First Peter 3:18b–22 is by all accounts the most difficult passage to interpret in 1 Peter—some say the entire New Testament. Lengthy academic works aim simply to describe the history of its interpretation, or even single aspects of it, such as Jesus’ speech “to the spirits in prison” (3:19). Indeed, since this is an expository commentary, I feel obligated to suggest that it might be best for pastors to preach 1 Peter 3:19–22 in conjunction with the larger passage, 3:13–22, of which it is a part.<sup>1</sup>However difficult 3:19–22 may <span>be, if we read the passage in context and hold to the essentials of the faith, we will at least avoid major error.<sup>2</sup> </span></p>
        <p>Taking 1 Peter 3:13–22 as a whole, we see that the <span class="mini">end</span> of the passage gives reasons for the commands stated in the <span class="mini">beginning</span>. The passage is a cousin of 1 Peter 2:18–25. Both present Jesus as the supreme example of the innocent man who endures mistreatment. In 1 Peter 2, Jesus suffers injustice and entrusts himself to God. In 1 Peter 3, Jesus suffers for doing good and experiences God’s vindication. In each passage, Jesus both <span class="mini">illustrates and empowers</span> righteous action. Yet whereas 1 Peter 2 accents Jesus’ sacrifice, 1 Peter 3 calls attention to his resurrection, exaltation, and power over all (3:21–22).</p>
        <p>First Peter 3:13–18 explains that Christians who suffer are “blessed” and free from fear because they know Christ as Lord. The Christian keeps a clear conscience so that those who malign believers “may be ashamed of their slander” (3:14–16). Further, “it is better . . . to suffer for doing good than for doing evil” (3:17). No suffering can thwart God’s purposes, Peter states, “for Christ died for sins once for all . . . to bring you to God” (3:18a). But after he died, God raised him in power and vindicated him, giving us strong hope of the same vindication (3:18, 22).</p>
        <p>Scholars generally agree that 1 Peter 3:18–22 draws on an early creed or hymn, since the structure and vocabulary seem to differ from the rest of Peter, but to say more is to speculate. The texture of 3:18–19 is almost poetic:</p>
        <p class="blockquote">For Christ also suffered once for sins, <br/>the righteous for the unrighteous, <br/>that he might bring us to God, <br/>being put to death in the flesh <br/>but [being] made alive in the spirit [or “made alive by the Spirit,” <span class="smallcaps">NIV</span>] <br/>in which [or “through whom,” <span class="smallcaps">NIV</span>] he went and proclaimed [“preached,” <span class="smallcaps">NIV</span>] <br/><span style="margin-left:3.8em"/>to the spirits in prison. (<span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>)</p>
        <p>Even here, in the easier part of the passage, there are riddles. Above all, it seems impossible to be sure whether the Greek means that Jesus was made alive in his human spirit or made alive by God’s Spirit. Further, did he preach in his spirit or did he preach in the power of God’s Spirit? Interpreters and translators are divided and uncertain. First, Greek doesn’t use capital letters except for personal names, so we don’t know whether <span class="mini">spirit</span> should be capitalized, to refer to the Holy Spirit, or not, to refer to Jesus’s spirit. Either reading makes sense in context. Second, the word <span class="mini">spirit</span> is in the dative case, without a clarifying preposition. As a result, the sense could be that Jesus is alive <span class="mini">in</span> or <span class="mini">with regard to</span> his spirit or that he is alive <span class="mini">by means of</span> God’s Spirit.</p>
        <p>If we step back from the exegetical uncertainties, however, we see that each reading is possible grammatically and theologically because other sections of the New Testament show that both are true: Jesus is alive in his human spirit and by the Holy Spirit. Moreover, Jesus both preached in his spirit and by the Holy Spirit, since the Spirit empowered all of Jesus’ life and ministry. From Luke 1–4 alone, we know that the Spirit begat Christ (Luke 1:35), entered him at baptism (3:16, 22), led him to combat Satan (4:1), and empowered his miracles and his message (4:14, 18). Let’s not be dismayed that it’s difficult to separate the work of the spirit of Jesus the man from the work of God the Spirit. Rather, we should give thanks for the unity in the work and persons of the triune God.</p>
        <p>Whatever the uncertainties in 1 Peter 3:18–19, the main theme is manifest: When Jesus suffered unjustly, God vindicated him, and he will vindicate us, too. Further, there is a tight connection between verses 18 and 22, where identical aorist passive participles (all ending with the letters <span class="mini">-theis</span>) connect what humans did <span class="mini">to</span> Jesus and what the Father did <span class="mini">for</span> Jesus.</p>
        <p class="blockquote">He was put to death, by men, in the flesh (<span class="mini">thanatōtheis</span>). <br/>He was made alive in the Spirit [or in his spirit] (<span class="mini">zōopoiētheis</span>). <br/>He has gone to heaven (<span class="mini">poreutheis</span>).</p>
        <p style="text-indent:0">This threefold declaration is the framework for the passage. Jesus was put to death, and then rose to life and ascended into heaven. Peter wants us to know that if we suffer and even die for the faith, God will raise and vindicate us, too. It is all too common for Western Christians to obsess over their pains and sorrows. But if we can discipline ourselves to lift our <span>eyes from present troubles, we should find courage in knowing that we will follow the pattern of Christ, through suffering to resurrection and vindication. </span></p>
        <p>The skeleton of 1 Peter 3:18–22 is clear, but questions abound. First Peter 3:19–20 (<span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>) says that Jesus “went and proclaimed to the spirits in prison, because they formerly did not obey, when God’s patience waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was being prepared, in which a few, that is, eight persons, were brought safely through water.” Four questions seem prominent: (1) Where did Jesus go? (2) Who were the spirits in prison? (3) What is their prison? (4) What did Jesus say to them?</p>

        <h2>The Misuse of Our Passage</h2>
        <p>If we hope to interpret this passage correctly, we cannot import 1 Peter 4:6 or Ephesians 4:9 or the Apostles’ Creed (“he descended into hell”) into it. The passage does <span class="mini">not</span> say that Jesus “descended,” nor does it mention hell. It states that he <span class="mini">went</span>, not that he <span class="mini">went down</span>. Further, we cannot assume that <span class="mini">prison</span> (<span class="mini">phulakē</span>) means “hell.” New Testament Greek had an ample vocabulary to refer to the idea of hell or the realm of the dead—<span class="mini">Hades</span>, <span class="mini">Gehenna</span>, <span class="mini">the abyss</span>, <span class="mini">the lake of fire</span>, <span class="mini">the outer darkness</span>, <span class="mini">Tartarus</span>—but <span class="mini">prison</span> is no part of that vocabulary.<sup>3</sup> Clearly, we must read Peter on its own terms.</p>
        <p>Furthermore, the likelihood of misreading multiplies when people come looking for evidence to support their heterodox ideas. Specifically, there is interest in finding, in 1 Peter 3, evidence of a postmortem evangelistic proclamation of the gospel. That proclamation might be for those who never heard the gospel in this life or for those who heard but rejected it. At the popular level, we have <span class="mini">Love Wins</span>, by the difficult-to-categorize pastor Rob Bell. Evincing a slippery grasp on history as well as theology, Bell asserts, “At the center of the Christian tradition since the first church have been a number who insist that history is not tragic, hell is not forever, and love, in the end, wins and all will be reconciled to God.”<sup>4</sup>Of course, to reach universal <span>salvation, there must be postmortem evangelism.<sup>5</sup> To my knowledge, Bell never actually cites 1 Peter 3. But it would be plausible for self-identified Christians to do so, since they like to appeal to Scripture. </span></p>
        <p>Archbishop Hilarion Alfeyev of the Russian Orthodox Church does appeal to 1 Peter 3 in his substantive monograph, <span class="mini">Christ the Conqueror of Hell</span>. Alfeyev focuses more on patristic tradition and orthodox liturgy than on Scripture, but he does cite 1 Peter 3:19 and 4:6 as he starts his argument. He claims that Peter’s words “serve as the basis for understanding” how Jesus’ “preaching in hell” reached Noah’s generation, described in Genesis 6:<sup>6</sup></p>
        <p class="blockquote">Those who were condemned earlier “according to men in the flesh” by God who, according to the biblical expression, “was sorry” that he had created them, did not perish eternally. Christ descended into hell, granting them another chance of salvation by preaching to them the Gospel of the kingdom so that they might live “according to God in the spirit.”<sup>7</sup></p>
        <p>Alfeyev wants to draw on Scripture, and for about three pages he mentions seven or eight passages that “serve as the basis” for his assertion that the patristic and orthodox tradition, especially in its liturgy, has long claimed that Christ descended into hell and preached, postmortem, to those who had not believed in him while on earth. Further, his tradition says that Jesus “freed all who were held captive” and “emptied hell” so that no mortals remained. Thus, Jesus descended into hell as Conqueror, to mortify death and destroy hell.<sup>8</sup></p>
        <p>A scholar such as Alfeyev chooses his words carefully, so that the phrase “serve as the basis” is telling. The New Testament texts that he cites indeed “serve” his argument. He cites them but does not attempt to make his case from them. Indeed, he gives just three pages on the New Testament, but grants fourteen pages on apocryphal literature, sixty on the patristic tradition, and fifty on the liturgy of the Orthodox Church. Alfeyev will hardly be the only person to see whether 1 Peter can serve his purposes, cite him <span>briefly, and move on. For Alfeyev, like others in the Roman and Orthodox tradition, tradition has as much weight as Scripture—more in some cases, since the tradition teaches us how to interpret Scripture. In that tradition it is acceptable to argue this way: </span></p>
        <ul>
          <li>Scripture could indicate X.</li>
          <li>While Scripture isn’t clear regarding X, our tradition affirms X with certainty.</li>
          <li>Therefore, we affirm X with certainty.</li>
        </ul>
        <p>Let no evangelical Protestant follow that pattern of reasoning. It is fine to say, “Scripture is not clear, but our confession says,” and then show respect to a confession that captures the wisdom of godly leaders past. But those who profess the supreme authority of Scripture should never argue: “Scripture is not clear, but our confession is. Therefore, we affirm and <span class="mini">require</span> adherence to the confession.” Instead, let the many bodies that affirm the Westminster Confession appreciate the genius of its assertion that Scripture is infallible but councils are not. And let us require supreme allegiance to God and his Word. No human artifact merits such loyalty.</p>

        <h2>The Gospel Proclaimed to the “Spirits in Prison”</h2>
        <p>The task of the faithful expositor is clear. If we cannot plumb the mysteries of the passage, we can (1) state the main, clear points and (2) avoid major error by refusing to base novel doctrines on an obscure passage.</p>
        <p>So, then, Peter states that Jesus “preached” (<span class="smallcaps">NIV</span>) or “proclaimed” (<span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>, <span class="smallcaps">NASB</span>) something. The Greek verb is not <span class="mini">euaggelizomai</span>, “to preach the gospel or good news,” but <span class="mini">kērussō</span>, “to make a proclamation.” Like other words, <span class="mini">kērussō</span> has a range of meanings, and it can be used for evangelistic proclamations (e.g., Rom. 10:8–15; Gal. 2:2), but it typically means “to make an official announcement or public declaration,” not “to evangelize” (e.g., Mark 1:45; Gal. 5:11; Rev. 5:2). So we need not think that Jesus <span class="mini">evangelized</span> the spirits in prison.</p>
        <p>Next, who are these “spirits in prison”? Theories abound. They could be the demons that Jesus cast out during his ministry in Israel, as they await a final reckoning hinted at in Luke 8:26–33. But there is barely a scrap of <span>evidence for this interpretation. They could be all the saints of old, waiting for Jesus to liberate them from Sheol or the bonds of death. But the efficacy of Jesus’ sacrifice is not bound by time. There is no need to believe that Old Testament saints were separated from God from the day of their death to the day of Jesus’ resurrection. The spirits could be the antediluvian generation of humans who lived in the darkness of Noah’s day. But why would they be singled out to hear Jesus’ words? Or they could be fallen angels, perhaps those mentioned in Genesis 6 and imprisoned by God (2 Peter 2:4; Jude 6). The last option, that Jesus made a proclamation to fallen angels, is most widely adopted, for several reasons. </span></p>
        <p>First, in the New Testament, the word <span class="mini">spirits</span> (plural) “always refers to non-human spiritual beings unless qualified.” It calls deceased humans <span class="mini">souls</span> (<span class="mini">psuchē</span>).<sup>9</sup> So unless this passage is the lone exception (and it would be special pleading to claim that it is), <span class="mini">spirits</span> does not mean “humans” here either. Typically, <span class="mini">spirits</span> refers to evil spirits or fallen angels.</p>
        <p>Second, we can identify the spirits who “disobeyed . . . in the days of Noah.” In Peter’s time, the most common Jewish understanding of Genesis 6 held that fallen angels played a great role in corrupting humans in Noah’s generation. These fallen angels are prominent in 1 Enoch 12–21. Of course, Enoch is not authoritative, but it was a widely known and revered book at the time, so we can expect readers to pick up an allusion to it.<sup>10</sup> First Enoch 21:6–10 says that fallen angels “transgressed the commandment of the Lord” and so were bound to prison.</p>
        <p>Third, as we saw earlier, <span class="mini">prison</span> probably does not refer to hell, since the New Testament uses many other terms for the location of dead, unredeemed humans. We notice that no location for Peter’s prison is given. It seems wise (if not certain) to take <span class="mini">prison</span> as a metaphor for God’s control over evil spirits. Jesus’ domination of evil spirits is certainly a pervasive theme in the Gospels and Acts, as both he and his apostles break their power and force them to submit to his will. Indeed, the Synoptics’ principal explanation of Jesus’ power over demons uses a similar metaphor for his control of Satan:</p>
        <p class="blockquote"> But if I drive out demons by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God has come upon you. <br/><span style="margin-left:1em"/>Or again, how can anyone enter a strong man’s house and carry off his possessions unless he first ties up the strong man? (Matt. 12:28–29)</p>
        <p>We cannot know what Jesus told the spirits in prison, but several New Testament themes would be appropriate: Their realm is now under his dominion. Every knee will bow to him. Their doom is sealed, since Jesus’ death and resurrection concludes and demonstrates his control over evil in all places and forever. Martin Luther supposedly said that if Jesus descended into hell, he spent three days thumbing his nose at the devil. There may be truth to the gibe. After all, demons seem confused about Jesus’ life and ministry. In the beginning, when Satan tempted Jesus, he offered bloodless paths to glory (Matt. 4:1–11). But at the end, he prompted Judas to betray Jesus to death (John 13:27). Perhaps Jesus proclaimed that his death, resurrection, and exaltation sealed their defeat and doom. We cannot now know. But we do know that nothing in 1 Peter 3 promotes the idea that Jesus evangelized humans after their deaths.</p>
        <p>Indeed, if we want to guard against uncertainty by asserting what is certain, let us affirm this: If the essence of hell is separation from God, then Jesus “descended into hell” on the cross. He experienced separation from the Father while on the cross. The Apostles’ Creed declares that Jesus was crucified, dead, and buried and that he descended into hell. What the creed says is true, but the order of two phrases should be reversed to read, “He was crucified, descended into hell, was dead and buried, and rose again on the third day.” Jesus’ main descent into hell occurred on the cross. After his death, Scripture notes, he did not join the devil in hell; he joined the Father in paradise (Luke 24:34, 46).</p>
        <p>God gives people ample opportunity to repent in this life. Indeed, Peter relates, during the long years when Noah built the ark, “God waited patiently,” but no one responded to the call to repent. Sadly, Peter says, “in it only a few people, eight in all, were saved through water” (1 Peter 3:20). With this segue to baptism, Peter presents a similarity between Noah’s family and the family of Christians. The senses are different, but both are saved through water. Yet whereas a <span class="mini">few</span> were saved through water in Noah’s day, now, Peter asserts, baptism saves <span class="mini">you</span> through the resurrection of Christ.</p>

        <h2>“Saved through Water”: Claiming the Promise of Baptism</h2>
        <p>Whatever the differences between Noah’s clan and the family of Christ, in each case God’s people cling to his covenant promises by faith and the Lord rescues his flock. According to Peter, Noah’s family was “saved through water” (1 Peter 3:20). He continues, “Baptism, which corresponds to this, now saves you, not as a removal of dirt from the body but as an appeal to God for a good conscience, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ, who has gone into heaven” (3:21–22a <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). If we streamline 1 Peter 3:21a, we hear the words “baptism now saves you” (the <span class="smallcaps">NASB</span> uses the exact sequence). The church has long debated these words.</p>
        <p>In the early church, many thought baptism to be essential for salvation and embodied that conviction in the emergency baptism of dying infants. Later, Augustine stated that infants were incorporated into the faith and life of the church by their baptism. Others focused on the long preparation of adult converts for baptism. They linked baptism and the confession of faith, by which one shares in the death and resurrection of Christ. In the Middle Ages, Thomas Aquinas and others stressed that God dispensed his grace through the seven sacraments. In that system, baptism had the essential role of removing the guilt of original sin.</p>
        <p>Protestants, as we know, debate whether baptism is rightly applied to children and, if so, what it signifies and what it accomplishes. Risking oversimplification, we can say that most Protestants aim to avoid two errors. First, mindful of the passages that declare what baptism <span class="mini">does</span>, they do not want to reduce baptism to a mere sign of graces already received. For Scripture says that baptism unites us to Christ (Rom. 6:1ff.), clothes us with Christ (Gal. 3:27), and joins us to the body of Christ (1 Cor. 12:13).</p>
        <p>But second, we also know that the action of baptism does not, in itself, save. (We deny the Roman concept of <span class="mini">ex opere operato</span>—“by the work, worked.”) Scripture says that <span class="mini">the Lord Jesus saves</span>, by grace through faith, in climactic texts such as Acts 2:21; 15:11; 16:31; and Romans 10:9–10. Further, it is all too obvious that many of the baptized eventually reject the Lord and his covenant.</p>
        <p>Therefore, Protestants affirm that God gives grace in baptism and yet deny that it guarantees salvation or necessarily regenerates unto eternal life. We want to stand between two errors. We deny that baptism is a <span class="mini">mere</span><span>sign and we deny that baptism is an <span class="mini">intrinsically efficacious</span> sign. But what does baptism accomplish?>></span></p>
        <p>The Westminster Confession of Faith seems both to avoid our two dangers and to state the positive role of baptism. In 28.1, it states that baptism is a sacrament “ordained by Jesus Christ” for the admission of the “party baptized into the visible Church” and “a sign and seal of the covenant of grace, of his ingrafting into Christ.” The confession turns to the efficacy of baptism in 28.5–6:</p>
        <p class="blockquote">28.5. Although it is a great sin to contemn or neglect this ordinance, yet grace and salvation are not so inseparably annexed unto it, as that no person can be regenerated, or saved, without it: or, that all that are baptized are undoubtedly regenerated.</p>
        <p class="blockquote">28.6. The efficacy of Baptism is not tied to that moment of time wherein it is administered; yet, notwithstanding, by the right use of this ordinance, the grace promised is not only offered, but really exhibited, and conferred, by the Holy Ghost, to such (whether of age or infants) as that grace belongs unto, according to the counsel of God’s own will, in His appointed time.</p>
        <p>At a minimum, this is a classic Protestant statement on baptism. If baptism is “a sign and seal of the covenant of grace,” then it is a means of saving grace. The confession accents the grace promised in the covenant and union with Christ. There is strong warrant for both themes. Romans 6:1–4 says that we are baptized into union with Jesus in his death and resurrection (cf. Gal. 3:27). And Acts 2:38–41 links baptism and covenantal grace when Peter, at the climax of his Pentecost sermon, tells his convicted listeners, “Repent and be baptized . . . . The promise is for you and your children.”</p>
        <p>Still, the principle of <span class="mini">sola Scriptura</span>nudges us to lay down the confession and consider other Scriptures. We begin with the source and starting point of Christian baptism, Jesus’ Great Commission in Matthew 28:18–20. There, Jesus places baptism in the context of disciple-making (theological debates tend to focus on regeneration and salvation, which are related but distinct). In the Great Commission, Jesus tells the apostles to “make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, and teaching them to obey everything I have commanded you.” In this case, teaching and baptizing are means or instruments of discipleship.<span>For adults, baptism is a confirmation of their faith and an instrument of their union with the triune God. For children, the Spirit may or may not impart new life at the time of baptism, but baptism can surely be a means for discipleship. For instance, when a child witnesses an infant baptism during worship, parents (or others) can remind the child of his or her own baptism: </span></p>
        <p class="blockquote">We baptized you when you were little, too. We promised to raise you to trust Jesus. The pastor put water on you, too. We use water for washing, and when we baptized you, we asked God to wash away your sins. The pastor also said, “In the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit” for you. That means that he asked God to be your God. Now you belong to him. We all want you to believe in God for yourself, but baptism means that you are never all by yourself. See how the family always comes to baptisms and how the whole church is there? Our family came, too, and we pray for you. The people of the church promised to care for you as well. We teach you and pray for you so that you will belong to God and follow him all your life. [Friends in the Baptist tradition can adopt this outlook, with necessary adjustments, since infant dedication shares substantial common ground with infant baptism.]</p>
        <p>Is all of this consistent with 1 Peter 3? Yes, although it is not immediately obvious. To quote the <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>, which offers an essentially literal, word-for-word translation: “Baptism, which corresponds to this [the baptism of Noah’s family], now saves you, not as a removal of dirt from the body but as an appeal to God for a good conscience, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ” (3:21).</p>
        <p>We still hear the words “baptism . . . now saves you.” Yet Peter is clear that neither water nor baptism, per se, can save. The act itself does not save. What saves is the “appeal to God for a good conscience.” What saves, to paraphrase, is the proper awareness of God that leads someone to seek and find peace with him. This occurs, however, not on the basis of the interest or effort of the person in question, but “through the resurrection of Jesus Christ, who has gone into heaven and is at the right hand of God, with angels, authorities, and powers having been subjected to him” (1 Peter 3:21–22 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). The risen and reigning Christ saves and is the basis of our appeal to God. Water baptism represents all this.</p>
        <p>So Peter returns to the conquering power of Jesus’ resurrection and ascension and the assurance it brings. Jesus “suffered once for sins, the righteous for the unrighteous, that he might bring us to God” (1 Peter 3:18 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). To <span>atone for sin, Jesus had to endure the pain and shame of the cross. Still, just as Jesus’ openness to dangerous obedience is our model, his ascension and exaltation are our hope, for God raised him from the dead and seated him “at God’s right hand” (3:21–22). Peter assures us that just as the Father vindicated Jesus, so he will vindicate us if we suffer for him. That ought to motivate the fearlessness Peter advocated in 3:14. If we have the mind of Christ, we can and should put it into practice. </span></p>
        <p>Peter has already described how the mind of Christ galvanizes us for courageous living. We fear God, not humanity (1 Peter 2:17; 3:15). We commit to make God’s grace visible (3:15–16). In troubles, we await vindication and entrust ourselves to God, who judges justly (2:23). Because Jesus conquered death, nothing can keep us from joining him at God’s right hand. We lay hold of God’s power by the faith that unites us to him, so his character and his deeds become ours. Naturally, all of this is easier said than done. We need the means of grace to lay hold of the courage that is ours—prayer, Christian community, praise (alone and in public worship), meditation, repentance, and the right use of the sacraments, including baptism. Whatever we find uncertain in life or in the message of 1 Peter 3, this should be clear. “Christ died for sins once for all, the righteous for the unrighteous, to bring you to God” (3:18). Now he “has gone into heaven and is at God’s right hand—with angels, authorities and powers in submission to him” (3:22).</p>
        <div class="reference">
          <hr style="margin-top:1.5em"/>
          <p class="footnote">1. Grammatically, the sentence that starts at 1 Peter 3:18 ends at 3:20, and a grammatical connection runs to the end of 3:22, so there is continuity from verses 18 to 22. I believe it is generally best for pastors to preach through the grammatical units of a book when possible. The mind of the expositor is more likely to conform to the mind of the apostle and of Christ. There is less temptation for the teacher to seize topics in the text and separate them from it. While it can be difficult to preach the entire unit when working with longer passages, it is generally feasible in New Testament epistles. A pastor could cover 1 Peter 3:13–22 in one sermon, focusing on 3:13–18, and then treat the certainties and essentials of 3:19–22. Not every congregation is ready for an entire sermon on a text as complex as 3:19–22.</p>
          <p class="footnote">2. Interested pastors may turn to reliable academic commentaries by Achtemeier, Davids, Goppelt, Jobes, and Michaels if they wish to probe riddles of the passage in detail.</p>
          <p class="footnote">3. See “Regions below the Surface of the Earth,” in Johannes Louw and Eugene Nida, <span class="mini">Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament: Based on Semantic Domains</span>, 2nd ed. (New York: United Bible Societies, 1998–99), 1:5–7.</p>
          <p class="footnote">4. Rob Bell, <span class="mini">Love Wins: A Book about Heaven, Hell, and the Fate of Every Person Who Ever Lived</span> (New York: HarperOne, 2011), 109.</p>
          <p class="footnote">5. Fans of C. S. Lewis must acknowledge that he at least made it possible to read <span class="mini">The Great Divorce</span> as a guess at how that might occur.</p>
          <p class="footnote">6. Hilarion Alfeyev, <span class="mini">Christ the Conqueror of Hell: The Descent into Hades from an Orthodox Perspective</span> (St. Vladimir’s Seminary Press, 2009), 19.</p>
          <p class="footnote">7. Ibid., 18–19.</p>
          <p class="footnote">8. Ibid., 203–18.</p>
          <p class="footnote">9. Peter H. Davids, <span class="mini">The First Epistle of Peter</span> (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1990), 139–40.</p>
          <p class="footnote">10. We may say that an allusion to Enoch in that day might be picked up much as an allusion to C. S. Lewis’s Aslan might be picked up today.</p>
        </div>

    </section>
  </body>
</html>
