<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <title>Reformed Expository Commentary: 1 Peter</title>
    <link href="../styles/mywsb-dev.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body epub:type="bodymatter">
    <section epub:type="chapter">

        <h1>16. Jesus Shepherds His Church through Servant Leaders</h1>
        <p class="h1sub">1 Peter 5:1–4</p>
        <p class="center" style="margin:0 3em 3em 3em"><span class="mini">  To the elders among you, I appeal as a fellow elder, a witness of Christ’s sufferings and one who also will share in the glory to be revealed: Be shepherds of God’s flock that is under your care, serving as overseers—not because you must, but because you are willing, as God wants you to be; not greedy for money, but eager to serve; not lording it over those entrusted to you, but being examples to the flock. And when the Chief Shepherd appears, you will receive the crown of glory that will never fade away</span>. (1 Peter 5:1–4)</p>

        <h2>The Paradoxes of Leadership</h2>
        <p>Leadership is a paradox—a glory and a ruin, a privilege and a torment. People look <span class="mini">for</span>leaders, who are in short supply, and look <span class="mini">to</span> leaders, whose skills are often exaggerated. People assist and advise them, favor and flatter them, haunt them and hover over them. But others suspect, criticize, and condemn. They drown their leaders and delight in their demise. It’s so <span>much easier to review a book (or movie) than it is to write (or direct) one. And it’s so much easier to rail at a leader than to be one. Every step up is simultaneously a step down. </span></p>
        <p>Every leader knows the paradoxes of headship, sees them, hears them, smells them coming, in the way that fits his realm. A judge has great power. He ferrets out the truth, protects the defenseless, and punishes evildoers. He fines petty miscreants, jails the wicked, and acquits the innocent. But every sound judgment disappoints someone a little, and a few earn a leader full-blooded enemies. Headless chickens on the porch and slashed tires are one thing, death threats on wives and children another. Presidents and prime ministers are the most-loved and the most-detested persons in their lands, the objects of fevered adulation and plotted assassination. In the circle of fawning admirers, every wish is a command; but in the circle of foes, every gesture is reviled. The boss, the coach, the director, the governor—all loved, all scorned. Every privilege gained is a freedom lost.</p>
        <p>Few bear the mantle of authority with ease. One type is too quick to decide, too eager to lead, even to dominate, and readily abuses power. Another sort is too reluctant to command, too thin-skinned to endure. Rare indeed is Plato’s reluctant-but-willing philosopher king.</p>
        <p>Like the sad fish that daily ingest but never expel mercury until the concentrate cripples them, the leader never even hears of the easy problems. Only the toxic stuff reaches his desk, only the problems that no one else conquers.</p>
        <p>What sane person would want to be a leader? The deluded and power-hungry want it, the naive and grasping hunger for it. More importantly, those whom God has called and gifted to lead desire it. They want to change the world, to bring truth, peace, and grace to bear in churches and cities so that people find healing and life. They want to improve some part of creation and believe they know how to do it.</p>
        <p>Through Scripture, godly leaders have witnessed Jesus’ sufferings. Depending on their age and course of life, they see, whether dimly or fully, what it means to suffer with him. They also hope to share in his glory, and depending on their age and experience, they have either robust or guarded optimism about their chances. But whatever their expectation, they hope to shepherd God’s flock by their teaching and a godly example.</p>
        <p>Peter comes to the subject of leadership late in the epistle. He has already taught that we are God’s beloved people, raised to a living hope and an unfail<span>ing inheritance. We endure hardship, follow God’s Word, and live by God’s mercy. By his blood Jesus ransomed us from a futile way of life and called us to be holy (1 Peter 1:1–16). Believers are a holy priesthood, a holy nation set apart for God by their faith in Jesus and their determination to follow him in their social relations, in their marriages and their homes (2:5–4:19). When we follow Jesus we change, and change can create problems (4:1–4). When a sinner reforms, he leaves his old ways and old companions, who might resent the departure. Peter’s people had been pagans, and when they forsook pagan ways, they became outsiders, exiles in their own culture. The government also had suspicions, since the disciples refused to worship the emperor, an attitude that looked subversive. These social and political problems, taken together, convinced Peter that trials and persecution were inevitable for all who will to suffer with Christ rather than renouncing him: “Do not be surprised at the painful trial you are suffering, as though something strange were happening to you. But rejoice that you participate in the sufferings of Christ” (4:12–13, passim). </span></p>
        <p>The church needs stalwart shepherd leaders in such times.<sup>1</sup> Elders should not hesitate to lead the church, even though they might make themselves a target for persecution. In this willingness to suffer, Peter stands with Jesus and, calling himself a “fellow elder,” invites church leaders into solidarity with him.<sup>2</sup> Strong and steady hands are essential during a crisis.</p>
        <p>Yet churches need shepherds even in the best times. Even the saints can wander into sin, and the immature need a godly example (1 Peter 5:2–3). And however much individual Christians may progress, the church needs men to lead and to harness its diverse gifts (4:10–11). The greater the talents, the greater the need for leaders. It is the most gifted orchestra, comprising musicians with the greatest capacities and the most fertile imaginations, that needs the strongest conductor.</p>
        <p>Apart from the challenge of enduring persecution, all Scripture testifies that the church will also experience trouble from internal sources, from (1) <span class="mini">the heretical</span>, (2) <span class="mini">the immoral</span>, and (3) <span class="mini">the envious</span>. Peter’s prescriptions for elders answer all three problems. We begin with heresy and the antidote, experiential knowledge of true doctrine.</p>

        <h2>The Basis of Peter’s Leadership and Message</h2>
        <p>Peter speaks elder to elder: “ To the elders among you, I appeal as a fellow elder, a witness of Christ’s sufferings and one who also will share in the glory to be revealed” (1 Peter 5:1). We know that Jesus himself appointed Peter as an apostle and herald of the gospel, that Peter was one of the inner three, and that he was often a spokesman for the disciples. Yet with touching modesty, he calls himself a “fellow elder” rather than “apostle.” He locates himself with that band of elders who labor in the church. He stresses his equality with others and his empathy with their position, not his supremacy or even his authority.</p>
        <p>Nonetheless, elders (<span class="mini">presbuteroi</span>) <span class="mini">do</span>possess authority over the congregation. <span class="mini">Elder</span> was the customary term for a community leader in the Old Testament and in the Judaism of the Hellenistic age. Peter does not call the others “fellow elders” in a play at humility; he “makes the elders aware of their commission.” They now fulfill part of the work of the apostles themselves—the need to shepherd and care for all the congregations (2 Cor. 11:28; 1 Peter 5:2).<sup>3</sup></p>
        <p>Peter is “a witness of Christ’s sufferings” (1 Peter 5:1). Peter heard the words of Jesus and beheld his deeds, from the beginning (Acts 1:21), by the appointment of Jesus (Mark 3:14–16). He stood at Jesus’ side, both watching events and hearing Jesus’ explanation of them, so Peter, in turn, could declare both what happened and what it meant.</p>
        <p>No, Peter did not see <span class="mini">everything</span> with his own eyes; he fled before the crucifixion (Matt. 26:56). Nonetheless, he is a witness in the secondary sense that he <span class="mini">testified</span> to Jesus’ suffering. Thus, Peter partially shares the position of elders who proclaim the work of Jesus by drawing on the eyewitness testimony of others. In this limited sense, all elders are witnesses alongside the apostles.</p>
        <p>Further, Peter is “a partaker in the glory that is going to be revealed” (1 Peter 5:1b <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). So Peter stands beside the church’s elders, not above them. All witness to Jesus and wait to participate in Jesus’ glory. From the position of “fellow elder,” he exhorts the elders of the church. This is no condescension, no rhetorical subterfuge. He is not acting as though his fellow elders <span>were his peers; he is elevating them to his level. All witness to Christ. All share in his sufferings and glory, for Jesus’ life is a pattern for ours, as Peter has said before (2:21ff.). </span></p>
        <p>Peter is not denying his unique role as a witness of Jesus. As he proclaims in 2 Peter 1:16, he was and therefore is an eyewitness of Jesus’ majesty. But Peter wants to stress his solidarity with his fellow elders, and he can legitimately do so. After all, Peter was hardly a perfect leader. He contributed to Jesus’ suffering. He fell asleep when Jesus asked him to stand beside him in his anguish in Gethsemane, as he faced his death and separation from the Father. Hours later, after Jesus’ arrest, Peter denied that he even knew Jesus. Hours like these could lead one to ask how Peter (far from putting on humility) dares to present himself as a fellow elder.</p>
        <p>Indeed, Peter’s case can explain how anyone dares to be called or to call himself an elder or leader. In a way, the church has leaders because God appointed “some to be apostles,” prophets, evangelists, pastors, and teachers, as well as elders (Eph. 4:11; cf. Acts 14:23). Yet Peter illustrates the principle that no one, not even an apostle, <span class="mini">deserves</span> to lead. Again, Peter denied that he even knew Jesus. He did so in Jesus’ darkest hour, despite Jesus’ prior warning, despite promising that he would never betray Jesus, and despite his position as a leader and example.</p>
        <p>Beyond doubt, Peter’s actions disqualified him for church leadership. Yet here he is, an apostle and elder, shepherd and overseer (1 Peter 1:1; 5:1). He regained his position because Jesus reinstated him after his failures. After the resurrection, Peter and the other fishing disciples returned to the Sea of Galilee, and Jesus met Peter there (John 21:2–5).</p>
        <p>Jesus asked him, “Simon, . . . do you truly love me . . . ?” (John 21:15). The question was fair. Peter had claimed that he loved Jesus more than anyone else did: “Even if all fall away on account of you, I never will.” Yet Peter did fall away, even swearing an oath that he had never known Jesus (Matt. 26:33, 72).</p>
        <p>Peter had <span class="mini">denied</span> Jesus three times, so Jesus <span class="mini">questioned</span> him three times: “Do you love me?” Jesus wasn’t mocking Peter’s failure. Rather, Peter had denied Jesus three times, so Jesus asked three times, “Do you love me?” This allowed Peter to declare three times: “I love you, Lord; you know I love you.” That in turn lets Jesus reinstate Peter three times: “Feed my lambs,” “take care of my sheep,” “feed my sheep” (John 21:15–17). This was Peter’s restoration.</p>
        <p>Someone called this sequence Peter’s ordination exam. Jesus’ questions were quite different from our (perfectly valid) questions about forms of church government and adherence to confessions of faith. Jesus’ questions were also quite different from our half-solicitous, half-accusatory inquiries: “Have you learned your lesson? Do you promise never to do that again? Are you really sorry?” Jesus simply asked, “Do you love me?” That remains the great question for every church leader. Apart from our union with Jesus, whom we love, our labors can bear no fruit.</p>
        <p>The lessons are clear. First, no Christian leader is self-qualified, morally or spiritually. No one deserves to lead the church. Jesus forgives, appoints, and qualifies his apostles and elders. Second, the core of an elder’s qualification is the love of Jesus, both experienced and returned.</p>
        <p>The love of Jesus creates the essential desire to lead and care for God’s people. Despite the threat of persecution, leaders do so “because you are willing,” as Peter puts it (1 Peter 5:2). Elders must also hold to the faith with a clear conscience. They should be apt to teach and lead. They should be tested and proved faithful. They must have godly character. They must care for people inside and outside their church. They should lead their own families well and so gain a good reputation (Acts 20:17–35; 1 Thess. 5:12–15; 1 Tim. 3:1–13; 5:17–19; Heb. 13:17). But above all, they are beloved of God and must love God in return.</p>

        <h2>The Problem of Heretical Teachers</h2>
        <p>This foundational knowledge of Jesus and love for him is the antidote to the first internal challenge to the church and its leaders, the challenge of heretical teachers. In the New Testament, Paul says most about heretics and false teachers. Instead of leading in love, they are violent (spiritually) and quarrelsome (1 Tim. 6:3–5; cf. 2 Tim. 2:23–26).</p>
        <p>False teachers are “confident” and want to be recognized as “teachers of the law, but they do not know what they are talking about or what they so confidently affirm” (1 Tim. 1:7). Elders, by contrast, are “able to teach” (3:2). False teachers “have shipwrecked their faith” (1:19), whereas elders and deacons have been tested and are above reproach (3:1, 7, 10).</p>
        <p>Some false teachers are former church leaders. Paul foretold this in his final address to his beloved Ephesian elders: “Even from your own number men will arise and distort the truth in order to draw away disciples after <span>them” (Acts 20:30). In 1 Timothy 1:20, Paul names two of them—Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom he has “handed over to Satan.” This seems like the sort of public rebuke Paul requires when an elder is caught in sin (5:17–20). </span></p>
        <p>The greatest danger is that heretics will preach “a different gospel—which is really no gospel at all” in the truest sense of the word (Gal. 1:6–7). The “alternative” gospel is contrary to the word Paul preached and utterly defective: “If anybody is preaching to you a gospel other than what you accepted, let him be eternally condemned!” (1:9). These teachers miss the central gospel, and shift their interest to matters that are, at best, peripheral. They major in genealogies, myths, speculations, and vain discussions (1 Tim. 1:4–6). Today they burrow into the interpretation of creeds and catechisms, rather than Scripture itself. They try to distinguish between the early and late phases of thought leaders instead of asking whether they are right or wrong. Second Peter 2 further addresses false teachers. Speaking of the old covenant era, Peter says:</p>
        <p class="blockquote">But there were also false prophets among the people, just as there will be false teachers among you. They will secretly introduce destructive heresies, even denying the sovereign Lord who bought them . . . . Many will follow their shameful [or <span class="mini">sensual</span>] ways and will bring the way of truth into disrepute. In their greed these teachers will exploit you with stories they have made up. (2 Peter 2:1–3)</p>
        <p>Second Peter shows that the twin internal challenges of false teaching and immorality are linked. Peter explains that false teachers deny the Sovereign Lord so that they can claim to believe and yet live for selfish pleasure. They “carouse in broad daylight . . . , reveling in their pleasures while they feast with you. With eyes full of adultery, they never stop sinning; they seduce the unstable; they are experts in greed” (2:13–14). The antidote to such false and corrupt teachers is the holiness of the true Shepherd.</p>

        <h2>The Manner of a Godly Leader</h2>
        <p>Peter commands elders to “shepherd the flock of God that is among you”—that is, under the elder’s charge—“exercising oversight, not under compulsion, but willingly, . . . not for shameful gain, but eagerly” (1 Peter 5:2 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>).<sup>4</sup>This compressed <span>statement describes the duty, manner, and motives of godly leaders. First, they willingly shepherd and watch over the flock. In the agrarian world, everyone knew that sheep stray, find trouble, and cannot extricate themselves from it. Unless they receive constant care and oversight, they perish. </span></p>
        <p>Psalm 23 pictures the Lord as a shepherd to his people. In John 10, Jesus calls himself the Good Shepherd, the Lord who feeds his sheep, seeks the lost, gathers the scattered, and heals the wounded. Then he commissions men to become shepherds under him. God told David, “You will shepherd my people Israel” (2 Sam. 5:2). Jesus commanded Peter to be a shepherd, and now Peter commands elders to be shepherds. What the Lord did for them, they must do for others.</p>
        <p>Peter hints that an elder’s first task is to witness to Christ’s sufferings and glory (1 Peter 5:1). But he explicitly charges elders to watch over that part of God’s flock that is right in front of them (literally, “among you”) as their charge. Good shepherds care for <span class="mini">their flock</span>, not for the whole world.</p>

        <h2>Overseeing the Flock of God</h2>
        <p>Yet Peter first says that the people are “God’s flock” (1 Peter 5:2). We are, above all, <span class="mini">God’s</span>flock. That flock is under the care of elders and shepherds who watch out for and prevent trouble. We should take comfort that the flock belongs to God, not to man, for if we falter, God is the Chief Shepherd and will never forsake his people.<sup>5</sup></p>
        <p>C. S. Lewis noted that humans sometimes make strange claims to ownership. We talk about “my body” as if we had created the pulsating energy within us. We use the word <span class="mini">my</span> for ownership but fail to notice that <span class="mini">my</span> cannot possibly mean ownership most of the time. We use these phrases very differently: <span class="mini">my shoes</span>, <span class="mini">my coworker</span>, <span class="mini">my wife</span>, <span class="mini">my father</span>, <span class="mini">my church</span>, <span class="mini">my country</span>, and <span class="mini">my God</span>. We cannot reduce all these relationships to ownership, as in <span class="mini">my teddy bear</span>. For an unpleasant child, <span class="mini">my teddy bear</span> can mean “the bear I can pull to pieces if I like.”<sup>6</sup> Surely we cannot do what we like with <span class="mini">my church</span>. At worst, <span class="mini">my church</span> means “the church that ought to do what I want.”</p>
        <p>We should have a home church, and we may call it <span class="mini">my church</span>. But the church is God’s people and family before it is ours. Therefore, <span class="mini">my church</span> should mean the part of God’s family that is my spiritual home—the one I love, warts and all, and the one that loves me, warts and all</p>
        <p>The church is often so disappointing, so far short of God’s ideal. Particular churches hurt many people and many people <span class="mini">feel</span> hurt—which is <span class="mini">not</span> the same thing. Yet the church, as God sees the whole, is a glorious family that stretches across all lands and all centuries and leads to eternity. Sadly, even good churches—the better parts of the whole—are regularly places of shallow relationships, weak teaching, dull worship, and lazy prayers. Worse, some particular churches are breeding grounds for wounding relationships and heretical ideas, where worshipers are critics and it seems that everyone is either angry or asleep. Clearly, we need God to shepherd us even in our spiritual activities.</p>
        <p>The church will inevitably disappoint perfection-demanding attenders, if only because no style of music, liturgy, preaching, and serving suits everyone. More important, every church is entirely composed of sinners. (The church is the one organization in which all who join first declare themselves unworthy to join.) Since sinners do act the part, the church will inevitably fail its members. But the church’s failure is not equivalent to God’s failure. When the church fails, we must look past it to the Lord of the church.</p>
        <p>Pastors, elders, and shepherds must strive to represent the Lord well. All the while, we must remember that the church is his, not ours. He can accomplish what our plans and skills do not.</p>

        <h2>The Conduct of an Elder</h2>
        <h3>Serving Willingly, Not Grudgingly</h3>
        <p>These caveats notwithstanding, Peter still has standards for leaders. He states three principles for the <span class="mini">way</span> in which leaders conduct themselves. He states them in a series of three contrasts in 1 Peter 5:2–3 (<span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). Elders serve:</p>
        <ul>
          <li>not under compulsion, but willingly”;</li>
          <li>not for shameful gain, but eagerly”;</li>
          <li>not domineering over those in [their] charge, but being examples to the flock.”</li>
        </ul>
        <p>Clearly, elders must care for God’s people willingly, not coldly or grudgingly. “Willingly, not grudgingly” is a good ideal for every calling. The willing shepherd embraces God’s will and makes it his own, as a task freely chosen. This does not mean that we are always in the mood for every task. Every calling has its drudgery. There is a time to do our duty, as Jesus teaches in the parable of the unthanked servant (Luke 17:3–10). In a way, all ministry is a God-given duty or obligation, and not simply a result of our choice (1 Cor. 9:16). So, however willing our service, there is a time to do our duty, whether we feel like it or not</p>
        <p>But the main motive must be neither duty nor the compulsions of expectations, reputation, or social status, nor the thrall of models or precedents. We should act willingly and cheerfully, for “God loves a cheerful giver” (2 Cor. 9:7). Good cheer for our work makes us glad to get up and go to work in the morning.<sup>7</sup></p>

        <h3>Serving Eagerly, Not for Personal Gain</h3>
        <p>The call to serve “not for shameful gain, but eagerly” is best understood if we realize that the practice of compensating church leaders arose early in church history (1 Cor. 9:7; Gal. 6:6; 1 Tim. 5:17). But abuse of the privilege arose quickly, so that Peter, Paul, and postapostolic leaders all had to warn about “love of money” (1 Tim. 3:3; Titus 1:7; see also Paul’s refusal to take money in Acts 20:33).<sup>8</sup>To serve the church for the sake of money rather than the Lord and his people is shameful and akin to fraud.<sup>9</sup></p>
        <p>Sadly, what begins as willing service can become service rendered for the sake of rewards such as wealth and status. Leaders must examine themselves for this. The ancient Japanese tale of the crane wife hints at the way this <span>can happen: A poor but honest man finds a stricken crane on his doorstep, wounded by an arrow and unable to fly. He takes it in, cleanses the wound, nurses it to health, and releases it, thankful for the chance to do good. That very night a mysterious and beautiful woman appears at his doorstep, and they soon marry. Knowing her husband’s poverty, the wife soon begins to weave wondrous clothes out of silk that sell at a great price in the market. So she eases their poverty. The wife has one stipulation, to which her husband agrees: he must never watch her making her cloth. But he becomes greedy and presses her to weave more and more. Her health begins to falter, but his avarice blinds him. He eventually peeks into her secret room and sees her weaving the cloth from feathers she plucks from her own body. The crane, seeing him, flies away and never returns. </span></p>
        <p>Thus, slow-growing greed can corrupt good motives. Paul, by contrast, says, “We work with you for <span class="mini">your</span> joy” (2 Cor. 1:24). Peter notes that our service should also bring us joy, as we labor willingly, eagerly teaching, preaching, and counseling. By contrast, I knew a student at a heterodox seminary who seemed to have no love for Jesus, the Bible, or the church. When I asked why he planned to become a pastor, he replied that the work is secure, respectable, not especially taxing, and something of a family custom.</p>
        <p>It is no evil for shepherds to be paid for their labors, as 1 Corinthians 9:1–14 shows. If an elder left his regular work, it was fair for the church to pay him, especially if he worked long and well (1 Tim. 5:17). The problem is not payment; it is service for the sake of payments that bring personal gain.</p>
        <p>It’s one thing to <span class="mini">make</span>money, another to <span class="mini">serve</span> it. Let us take care not to follow the money, to choose work simply because it offers more payment or status. Let us pray, “Lord, show me if money or popularity is too much a motive in my life.”<sup>10</sup></p>

        <h3>Not Domineering but Setting an Example</h3>
        <p>To review, Peter sets up the manner of elders’ service through three contrasts: “not under compulsion, but willingly . . . ; not for shameful gain, but eagerly; not domineering over those in [their] charge, but being examples to the flock” (1 Peter 5:2–3 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). Peter’s third lesson is that leaders should operate more by setting an example than by wielding power. They lead <span>their portion or share of God’s flock, their share of the universal church, the group they actually know. </span></p>
        <p>When Jesus said that Gentile rulers lord it over their subjects, he described the way of the world (Matt. 20:25).<sup>11</sup> In ancient times, people measured status by the number of servants or slaves they possessed. Today, we ask how many people take a man or woman’s orders, how many attend this church or sign up for that class. But Jesus says, “Not so with you” (20:26). Rather, “Whoever wants to become great among you must be your servant.” Jesus exemplified that principle by coming not “to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many” (20:28).</p>
        <p>So godly leaders don’t domineer; they set an example. This, of course, generally happens apart from any design. We speak and act according to what lies in our heart. So we become examples by accident. Yet we should stay alert to observe and learn from the examples that others set for us. One pastor showed me how effective a hospital visit by phone can be, when everyone knows that a personal visit is daunting. Another taught me to let agitated people talk themselves out (time permitting) before venturing a reply. Take some time to label and remember the lessons you have learned from exemplary leaders.</p>

        <h2>The Problem of Immorality</h2>
        <p>The exemplary life of elders and shepherds is the antidote to the church’s second internal source of trouble: immorality (the others, again, are heresy and envy). Jude 4 describes the immoral this way: “Certain men whose condemnation was written about long ago have secretly slipped in among you. They are godless men, who change the grace of God into a license for immorality and deny Jesus Christ our only sovereign and Lord.”</p>
        <p>Jude 4 says that they “slip in” or infiltrate the church. Operating from within, they advocate a truncated gospel. They want the <span class="mini">grace</span>of Christ without the <span class="mini">lordship</span> of Christ. They love the <span class="mini">idea</span> of a gracious God who forgives whatever they do. They claim to know Jesus and ask for mercy, dreaming that the <span class="mini">idea</span> of grace, not sincerely embraced, somehow leads to the forgiveness of every sin, no matter how calculating. They <span>see Christian doctrine as a “Get out of hell free” card, but they do not know Jesus (Matt. 7:21). </span></p>
        <p>It is the character of heresy to take a biblical idea and isolate it from all true doctrine, so that the idea can be stretched to accommodate almost anything. As the saying goes, every heretic has his verse—or half-verse. Jude’s heretics seem to love 1 John 1:9: “If we confess our sins, he . . . will forgive us.” They lop off the last phrase, “and purify us from all unrighteousness.”</p>
        <p>Jude 12 says that these miscreants “boldly carouse together, looking after themselves” (<span class="smallcaps">RSV</span>). Literally, they are “shepherds who feed only themselves” (<span class="smallcaps">NIV</span>). That is, they shepherd or care for themselves only. As long as they are satisfied, all is well. They declare that they are their own shepherds and stand under no one’s authority. But even pastors and shepherds need pastors and shepherds. Everyone needs an authority in his or her life, even the authorities themselves.</p>

        <h2>The Problem of Envy</h2>
        <p>Another source of trouble in the church is envy. We can approach it through further reflection on Peter’s point that elders lead by example.</p>

        <h3>The Shepherd as Example</h3>
        <p>Perhaps because of naive and legalistic misuses of the concept, Protestants are reluctant to embrace the notion of imitation, even though it pervades the New Testament (e.g., Matt. 10:24–25; Luke 6:40; John 15:20; Rom. 8:29; Eph. 5:25–27; Phil. 2:3–8; Heb. 2:5–14; 1 John 3:2–3).<sup>12</sup> On most occasions, disciples hear that they are or will be like Jesus. But Paul establishes himself as an example in Philippians 3:17: “Join with others in following my example, brothers” (cf. 2 Thess. 3:9). He also tells the next generation of leaders to set an example for their people. Timothy must “set an example for the believers in speech, in life, in love, in faith and in purity” (1 Tim. 4:12). He commands Titus, “In everything set them an example by doing what is good” (Titus 2:7).</p>
        <p>Peter also affirms that all believers should imitate Jesus and that leaders will be faithful enough that they can set a secondary example. <span>First Peter 2:18–25 declares that believers should follow Jesus’ example, enduring mistreatment and trusting God for deliverance, just as he did. Now 1 Peter 5:3 says that godly leaders, with their eye on Christ, become examples or patterns for others.<sup>13</sup></span></p>

        <h3>The Roots of Envy</h3>
        <p>Sadly, the more exemplary the leader, the more likely that he or she will be both admired and attacked, adored and scorned. A beautiful life, filled with light, will attract a host who aspire to share in it, follow it, or imitate it. Admirers want for themselves what they admire, and that wanting easily becomes envy. Any prosperity, any success, will stimulate at least mild envy. But deep resentment aims to destroy every light that shines brightly, for the resentful believe that they suffer and grow dim when another prospers and shines. They reason: “Who does he think he is? He’s no better than we are! Let’s bring him down to size.”</p>
        <p>Resentment fuels senseless hate for athletes, speakers, politicians, business leaders, entertainers, artists, even elders and shepherds. Every day, the news offers a fresh version of mankind’s strange delight in the collapse, even humiliation, of some prominent person. Envy <span class="mini">can</span>spur people to work harder, to do the right thing, even if for the wrong reason. As Solomon puts it, “And I saw that all labor and all achievement spring from man’s envy of his neighbor” (Eccl. 4:4).<sup>14</sup></p>
        <p>But a great deal of envy is unalloyed malice. In Jesus’ case, the very teaching, miracles, and compassion that led the crowds to flock to Jesus led the Pharisees to envy, hate, and kill him. At Jesus’ trial, Pontius Pilate—hardly a sensitive man—readily saw that “it was out of envy that the chief priests had handed Jesus over to him” (Mark 15:10).</p>
        <p>Public figures and leaders constantly receive praise, gratitude, and adulation on one hand, and criticism and envy on the other. Envy is a wasting and self-destructive disease. It wants whatever others have, if they <span class="mini">seem</span> to be stronger, smarter, prettier, wealthier, more cool, more powerful, more <span class="mini">anything</span>. Envy is the bitter negative to the awesome and alarming positive of setting an example for God’s people.</p>
        <p> Like others, I find this adoration/scorn polarity painful at both ends. Only a madman enjoys irrational hatred, but adulation is just as alarming. We should think, “They are imitating me, a man afflicted with sores?”</p>
        <p>Sadly, James tells us that envy is universal: “Or do you think Scripture says without reason that the spirit he caused to live in us envies intensely?” (James 4:5).<sup>15</sup> Scripture certainly testifies that envy is a pervasive malady. Cain envied the favor that God showed Abel, but instead of seeking God’s favor himself, he sought to destroy the favor that Abel enjoyed by killing him. Saul envied David’s praise (1 Sam. 18), and Absalom envied David’s throne (2 Sam. 15). But the destructive character of envy of an ordinary man is never more clear than in the case of humble Moses.</p>
        <p>God chose Moses over his protests. As soon as his confrontation with Pharaoh ended with success, the people of Israel doubled his distress with rebellion, doubts, and demands. And as soon as that ended, lesser leaders decided that they wanted Moses’ seat. The voice of envy asks, “Are you any better than we are?” Moses’ own siblings, Aaron and Miriam, said those very words. They criticized Moses, ostensibly because they disapproved of the woman he had married. But envy lurked behind the accusation. They asked, “Has the L<span class="smallcaps">ORD</span> spoken only through Moses? . . . Hasn’t he also spoken through us?” (Num. 12:2). God himself defended Moses:</p>
        <p class="blockquote">When a prophet of the L<span class="smallcaps">ORD</span> is among you, <br/><span style="margin-left:1.2em"/>I reveal myself to him in visions, <br/><span style="margin-left:1.2em"/>I speak to him in dreams. <br/>But this is not true of my servant Moses; <br/><span style="margin-left:1.2em"/>he is faithful in all my house. <br/>With him I speak face to face, <br/><span style="margin-left:1.2em"/>clearly and not in riddles; <br/><span style="margin-left:1.2em"/>he sees the form of the L<span class="smallcaps">ORD</span>. (Num. 12:6–8)</p>
        <p>It is the lot of leaders to endure burdens in hard times and to suffer envy when life is easy. The wise prepare for this. Blessedly, God also promises to reward faithful leaders.</p>

        <h2>The Reward for Leaders</h2>
        <p>Leaders aim to be faithful stewards of the portion God assigns. It is a privilege to be God’s agent, and the harder the work, the greater the honor. We serve for the Master’s sake, not for pay, recognition, power, or rewards. Nonetheless, God promises a reward in 1 Peter 5:4: “And when the Chief Shepherd appears, you will receive the crown of glory that will never fade away.” The Chief Shepherd, also called “the great Shepherd” in Hebrews 13:20, cares for the universal church, and the elders shepherd their local congregations.</p>
        <p>When Jesus appears in the glory and victory of his second coming, the elders will receive an unfading crown of glory. The word translated “receive” (<span class="mini">komizō</span>) here means to receive what is owed, a payment, compensation, or reward.<sup>16</sup> Let us summarize the biblical teaching about such rewards.</p>
        <p>First, the doctrine of rewards is compatible with justification by grace, through faith. The Bible often remarks that we must render an account for every word and deed (Ps. 62:12; Jer. 17:10; Matt. 16:27; 2 Cor. 5:10; 1 Peter 1:17; Rev. 20:12). The beauty of the gospel is that, for believers, God does not treat us as our sins deserve (Ps. 103:10), but he does remember our good deeds and rewards us for them.</p>
        <p>Second, the leaders’ labor for the Lord’s eternal reward contrasts with the error (even sin) of greediness. Greed seeks rewards in this life; Peter promises an unfading crown that lasts forever.</p>
        <p>Third, the crown of glory confers neither power nor riches. The crown confers glory and honor. Thus, it is like the victor’s wreath in the Greek athletic festivals, not the king’s royal circlet of gold. To be precise, in the phrase “crown of glory,” <span class="mini">crown</span>is the metaphor and <span class="mini">glory</span> the reality.<sup>17</sup></p>
        <p>Fourth, this crown does not confer glory onto one individual rather than another. Rather, as 1 Peter 5:1 just noted, all of Peter’s fellow elders “will share in the glory to be revealed.” Indeed, every believer shares God’s incorruptible blessing. When Jesus appears in all his glory to re-create all things, <span>we will share his joy, and our unfading, imperishable crown of glory will reflect his glory (1 Cor. 9:25; 2 Tim. 4:8; Rev. 3:11). </span></p>
        <p>Let shepherds therefore follow Jesus and serve God’s flock. As he did, let us do so willingly, not grudgingly; eagerly and not for personal gain; not domineering, but setting a good example. In all, let us look back to Christ’s sufferings, which atoned for our sins. And let us look forward to his appearing, when he will grant us an unfading crown of glory.<sup>18</sup></p>
        <div class="reference">
          <hr style="margin-top:1.5em"/>
          <p class="footnote">1. Although this turn of thought is not explicit, 1 Peter 5:1 does begin with <span class="mini">oun</span>, “so” or possibly “therefore.” The conjunction points to a thought process. The church needs leaders for a reason.</p>
          <p class="footnote">2. Karen H. Jobes, <span class="mini">1 Peter</span> (Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2005), 300.</p>
          <p class="footnote">3. Leonhard Goppelt, <span class="mini">A Commentary on 1 Peter</span>, trans. John E. Alsup (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1993), 341.</p>
          <p class="footnote">4. The phrase “exercising oversight” translates the single participle <span class="mini">episkopountes</span>, which does not appear in all early manuscripts. But most do include it, and there is no convincing reason to doubt that it is original.</p>
          <p class="footnote">5. C. E. B. Cranfield, <span class="mini">I & II Peter and Jude</span> (London: SCM Press, 1960), 127.</p>
          <p class="footnote">6. C. S. Lewis, <span class="mini">The Screwtape Letters and Screwtape Proposes a Toast</span> (London: Geoffrey Bles, 1961), 97 (in chapter 21, for those working with other editions).</p>
          <p class="footnote">7. Sadly, those who do have passion for their work often fall into overwork and problems such as Sabbath violation, exhaustion, and frayed relationships.</p>
          <p class="footnote">8. J. Ramsey Michaels, <span class="mini">1 Peter</span>, Word Biblical Commentary 49 (Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 1988), 284–85; Jobes, <span class="mini">1 Peter</span>, 305. Polycarp, writing around <span class="smallcaps">A.D.</span> 140–50, urged the church to “avoid the love of money.” With the failure of an apparently well-known presbyter (elder) named Valens in mind, he asks, “But how may he who cannot control himself in these matters preach self-control to someone else? If any man does not avoid love of money, he will be polluted by idolatry.” Polycarp, “The Letter of Polycarp to the Philippians,” trans. Joseph Lightfoot, in <span class="mini">The Apostolic Fathers</span>, ed. Michael W. Holmes, 2nd ed. (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1992), 217 (11.2; cf. 5.2).</p>
          <p class="footnote">9. Frederick W. Danker, ed., <span class="mini">A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament and Other Early Christian Literature</span>, 3rd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000), 29, renders the Greek <span class="mini">aischrokerdōs</span>, translated “shameful gain,” as “in fondness for dishonest gain, greedily.”</p>
          <p class="footnote">10. Scot McKnight, <span class="mini">1 Peter</span>, <span class="smallcaps">NIV</span> Application Commentary (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1996), 272.</p>
          <p class="footnote">11. The Greek in both 1 Peter 5:3 and Matthew 20:25 is <span class="mini">katakurieuō</span>. The term can be descriptive rather than pejorative.</p>
          <p class="footnote">12. Daniel M. Doriani, <span class="mini">Putting the Truth to Work: The Theory and Practice of Biblical Application</span> (Phillipsburg, NJ: P&R Publishing, 2001), 201ff.</p>
          <p class="footnote">13. Peter uses different terms for “example”—<span class="mini">hypogrammon</span> in 1 Peter 2:21 and <span class="mini">tupos</span> in 5:3—but the sense is the same.</p>
          <p class="footnote">14. See also Joseph Epstein, <span class="mini">Envy</span> (New York: Oxford, 2003).</p>
          <p class="footnote">15. The proper translation of the Greek is debated; I have argued for the <span class="smallcaps">NIV</span> translation in my commentary, <span class="mini">James</span>, Reformed Expository Commentary (Phillipsburg, NJ: P&R Publishing, 2006), 136–38, 143–44</p>
          <p class="footnote">16. Danker, <span class="mini">Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament</span>, 557; Johannes Louw and Eugene Nida, <span class="mini">Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament: Based on Semantic Domains</span>, 2nd ed. (New York: United Bible Societies, 1998–99), 1:572.</p>
          <p class="footnote">17. Michaels, <span class="mini">1 Peter</span>, 287. From the perspective of Greek grammar, the phrase “crown of glory” is appositional or epexegetical. The crown is or consists of glory. The phrase “crown of life” is identical. See James 1:12; Rev. 2:10.</p>
          <p class="footnote">18. It could be sensible to discuss 1 Peter 5:5 here, for it is the last word about leadership. Yet it is also the first word in a series of closing exhortations, running from 5:5–11.</p>
        </div>

    </section>
  </body>
</html>
