<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <title>Reformed Expository Commentary: 1 Peter</title>
    <link href="../styles/mywsb-dev.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body epub:type="bodymatter">
    <section epub:type="chapter">

        <h1>13. Breaking with Sin</h1>
        <p class="center" style="font-family:NuptialScript;font-size:2em;margin-bottom:2em">1 Peter 4:1–6</p>
        <p class="center" style="margin:0 3em 3em 3em"><span class="mini">  Therefore, since Christ suffered in his body, arm yourselves also with the same attitude, because he who has suffered in his body is done with sin. As a result, he does not live the rest of his earthly life for evil human desires, but rather for the will of God</span>. (1 Peter 4:1–2)</p>

        <h2>Goals for Life</h2>
        <p>The pilgrims who settled New England came to America, from one perspective, because they felt alienated from their own culture. They first left England for Amsterdam, then Leiden, and then the New World, in a search for religious freedom. They left England because laws required attendance at the Church of England, which they considered corrupt. In Amsterdam and Leiden, some pilgrims found no work. When they saw their children becoming ever more Dutch, they decided to go to America. There they met cold, hunger, disease, hostility (since the natives had already met slavers), and, all too often, death. The pilgrims sacrificed so much because they wanted to pursue a life of purity and devotion to God. Their dedication shows that strong goals, rigorously pursued, can lead almost anywhere. But “anywhere” <span>could entail suffering, and suffering tempts some to abandon their goals. Yet if we give up when we face hardship, life becomes dull. There is less pain, but less meaning. Whether someone wants to start a new society or a new company, great goals are costly and demand sacrifices. </span></p>
        <p>Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi is a champion of goals. Well-chosen goals, he declares, leave us no time to be unhappy. Challenging and engaging goals leave us “little room . . . for noticing the entropy of normal life.” At a minimum, therefore, goals are a superb diversion. But how are we to choose the right goals? Adults cannot assume that meaning comes through traditional roles—woman as wife and mother, man as worker and provider. So, then, Csikszentmihalyi asks, “How do we know where to invest psychic energy?” No one can show us the goal that deserves our energy, so each person must discover his or her purpose independently, through trial and error and self-knowledge.<sup>1</sup></p>
        <p>Is Csikszentmihalyi right? Do we examine <span class="mini">ourselves</span> so that we can find or create meaning? Can we find the equilibrium between action and contemplation, so that we can pursue the right goals? How many have aimed at a goal, reached it, and then realized that it was a mistake? Further, we often choose noble goals and fail to reach them. We can choose marriage and suffer betrayal. We can choose a sensible career and watch it explode for reasons outside our control. Unfortunately, in order to be sure that we have chosen the right goals, we would need to be omniscient. And even if we choose the right goals, if we select the wrong means, we court disaster.</p>
        <p>I have spent many days working on projects or goals that I never envisioned. As a young man, I wanted to be a teaching professor, introducing students to the glories of Christian theology and philosophy. I expected to lead vibrant seminars that periodically ended with a cookout and Wiffle ball in my backyard. But for a decade, I led a large urban church where I raised money, solved communication problems, trained new staff, and wrote when time permitted. I never envisioned giving myself to the first three at all or giving so much to the last.</p>
        <p>Maybe I lost my way, maybe not. We make plans as best we can, staying within God’s revealed will. We measure our abilities, passions, and opportunities, yet we say “Lord willing” because Scripture teaches us to hold our <span>goals loosely. The Lord is free to overrule our plans: “To man belong the plans of the heart, but from the L<span class="smallcaps">ORD</span>comes the reply . . . . In his heart a man plans his course, but the L<span class="smallcaps">ORD</span> determines his steps” (Prov. 16:1, 9). That is, we can have goals, but must keep them open to revision.</span></p>
        <p>Perhaps we should think less of “my goals” and more of following God’s call to Christ and to holiness. Then we can take account of our gifts, training, and experiences. We know that we are on the right path if we say with Paul, “I want to know Christ and the power of his resurrection and the fellowship of sharing in his sufferings . . . . Forgetting what is behind and straining toward what is ahead, I press on toward the goal to . . . which God has called me” (Phil. 3:10, 13–14). The principal goal is to know Christ. Then we search for personal goals, which are secondary and provisional, open to God’s midcourse adjustments.</p>
        <p>God himself pursues goals, above all the redemption of humanity through the work of Jesus. And he assigns goals to some of his servants. He chose Moses to lead Israel from Egypt (Ex. 3:9–10) and Paul to proclaim the gospel to the Gentiles (Acts 9:15). We see the same thing in Peter himself. Still, because we see dimly, we might not perceive our God-given assignments. We might also think a task is ours when it is not. We must remember that David wanted to build the temple and that Nathan initially approved David’s desire (1 Chron. 17, 22).</p>
        <p>This shows, again, that we must maintain some critical distance or detachment from our plans. Our self-appraisals are always somewhat inaccurate and sometimes flatly erroneous, so we remain open to correction. And as long as we love and obey God, our tactical errors will be less damaging. Personal goals are less important if we do the good that lies before us and trust the results to God. Yet we dare not drift through life, taking whatever others thrust upon us, squandering our gifts because we fail to hone them. We may imagine ourselves as travelers on a great overland journey, from Cairo to Cape Town. We plan to visit places familiar from an earlier stint in East Africa. We know that parts of the trip—a cruise up the Nile, perhaps—will be safe and pleasant. Other phases will take us to semiclosed borders and to roads of dirt and sand that are more theoretical than substantial. Yet in all the uncertainty, there is a launch point and a terminus, and a sense of the way from one end to the other.<sup>2</sup></p>
        <p>This image can provide a lens on 1 Peter as a whole. Clusters of specific commands are found in 2:13–3:7 and 5:1–5, but large stretches have none. Rather, Peter offers a condensed epitome “of the Christian life and of the conduct that it inspires.”<sup>3</sup> He describes the work of Christ and the life that follows in ideal terms. Readers must discover how his general principles manifest themselves daily. Take Peter’s description of the atonement: “He himself bore our sins in his body on the tree” (2:24). He tells us that Jesus’ willingness to suffer and entrust himself to God sets us an example, but he adds no specifics. We need to apply it to ourselves.</p>
        <p>First Peter 4:1–6 is another case in point. It begins: “ Therefore, since Christ suffered in his body, arm yourselves also with the same attitude, because he who has suffered in his body is done with sin” (4:1). The passage assumes that, as Peter said earlier, God’s people are exiles and sojourners (1:1, 17; 2:11). It then labels the price we pay for that status. Old friends will not be pleased with a disciple’s new life. They will be startled, they will accuse, and they might graduate to physical violence (4:4, 12–19).</p>
        <p>Peter had already noted this danger and encouraged his people to endure it: “Even if you should suffer for what is right, you are blessed” (1 Peter 3:14). He stressed the conquering power of Jesus’ resurrection and the assurance that comes with it. Jesus “suffered once for sins, the righteous for the unrighteous, that he might bring us to God” (3:18 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). To atone for sin, Jesus had to endure the cross.<sup>4</sup> To follow Jesus, Peter’s people also need to forfeit their safety, entrusting themselves “to him who judges justly” as they endure opposition (2:23). Still, just as Jesus’ openness to dangerous obedience is our model, his ascension to God’s right hand is our hope (3:21–22).</p>
        <p>In the end we have one broad goal—to live “for the will of God” (1 Peter 4:2). There is a point of departure, the debauchery and idolatry of our pagan past (4:3). And there is a goal—the day we meet the Judge and account for ourselves (4:5). Other than that, the course of life is open as we leave sin behind and follow Christ.</p>

        <h2>A Fearless Life</h2>
        <p>Harking back to 1 Peter 3:18, “Christ died for sins once for all,” Peter promises that just as the Father vindicated Jesus, he will vindicate us if we suffer. That should supply the fearlessness that Peter advocated in 3:14. Here Peter commands, “Since Christ suffered in his body, arm yourselves also with the same attitude, because he who has suffered in his body is done with sin” (4:1). To survive persecution faithfully, we must prepare like soldiers, armed with the mind or insight of Christ.<sup>5</sup>Peter has already described that insight: We fear God, not humanity (2:17; 3:15). We commit to make God’s grace visible (3:15–16). In troubles, we have “a steadfast hope for vindication” and entrust ourselves to God, who judges justly (2:23).<sup>6</sup></p>
        <p>First Peter 4:1 adds, cryptically, that “he who has suffered in his body is done with sin.” The Greek verb translated “is done” means “to stop, cease, or have finished” with something.<sup>7</sup> That means that when we identify with Christ in his suffering, we break with sin globally. A willingness to suffer for the faith, for our convictions, is galvanizing. It is <span class="mini">empowering</span> to suffer for the Lord. A willingness to suffer proves our faith real. One secular historian noted, “A religion of compromise would not . . . have been a Christian religion.”<sup>8</sup> When we stay with Jesus at the cost of physical or material suffering, we follow him. The very willingness to suffer shows that we have made a break with sin in its essential selfishness. We see that there is more to us than rhetoric, that we <span class="mini">do</span> put the Lord ahead of self.</p>
        <p>The danger of suffering might seem far removed from pluralistic societies, but most nations remain hostile to the faith. (According to recent surveys, Christians are liable to persecution in well over a hundred nations.) Even in allegedly free nations, there are places where it is dangerous to own Christ. Peter’s people faced prison, beatings, or death. Around <span class="smallcaps">A.D.</span>50, Claudius expelled Christians from Rome and seized their property. Around 64–65, <span>Nero shed their blood. Hebrews 10 refers to lighter oppression: “Sometimes you were publicly exposed to insult and persecution; at other times you stood side by side with those who were so treated. You sympathized with those in prison and joyfully accepted the confiscation of your property, because you knew that you yourselves had better and lasting possessions” (Heb. 10:33–34). But it could get worse, the author of Hebrews says. He foresees bloodshed (12:4).</span></p>
        <p>Peter also sees heavier suffering approaching: “Dear friends, do not be surprised at the painful trial you are suffering, as though something strange were happening to you” (1 Peter 4:12). So he reminds them that Jesus suffered in the flesh, hinting that we should be ready for the same (4:1). When Jesus submitted to death on the cross, he defied the instinct of self-preservation. We can and must make the same break, even if we don’t face a clear test such as persecution. We make a similar break when we sacrificially give money, time, or personal peace in order to advance the cause of Christ.</p>
        <p>We distinguish a babysitter from a parent by this: In an emergency, she calls the parents and is free to leave when they arrive. Parents do not leave. The willingness to suffer with and for a child shows that a parent has broken with the life of the childless. So the believer who suffers for righteousness has broken with the easy life. The commitment to ease and pleasure is the source of so much sin. A faith that endures suffering is done with that.</p>
        <p>Imagine a man who, after a string of reversals, examines himself and decides that he is angry, cynical, lazy, and arrogant, despite a singular lack of achievement. He resolves to change, to become a decent human. Yet he knows that mere resolve is insufficient. He must <span class="mini">do</span> something. That night he takes his wife to a play he hates, because <span class="mini">she</span> likes it. On the way home, he gives $90 to a homeless man, keeping just $10 for himself. He knows it’s foolish, but he had to give something away that day, to seal his break with the old life.<sup>9</sup> A willingness to sacrifice, to suffer loss, proves that he has changed.</p>
        <p>Arm yourselves with this willingness to suffer, Peter urges, “so as to live for the rest of the time in the flesh no longer for human passions but for the will of God” (1 Peter 4:2 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). Our “time in the flesh” is our allotted time on earth, whether long or short. It is our span of days, our “time of exile,” <span>whether filled with joy or sorrow (Ps. 90:9–17; 1 Peter 1:17). Our lifestyle and our passions can be good or bad. We can indulge evil passions or pursue good ones, but disciples live “for the will of God.” </span></p>

        <h2>An Indulgent Life</h2>
        <p>In 1 Peter 4:3, Peter explains that his people should live well from that time onward: “For you have spent enough time in the past doing what pagans choose to do—living in debauchery, lust, drunkenness, orgies, carousing and detestable idolatry.” This is ironic understatement. One day is more than enough time for debauchery and idolatry, and Peter’s readers had spent their lives at these things until they received the gospel.</p>
        <p>Peter’s list of sins fits the times. Debauchery, lust, drunkenness, orgies, and carousing are sensual sins. Many pagans gave themselves to such things, to liaisons with slaves, concubines, courtesans, and lovers, to drinking and feasting, as far as their resources and their need to protect their reputation permitted.<sup>10</sup> Idolatry was the norm, but we need to purge certain contemporary concepts if we want to understand it. The principal religions of the time, emperor worship and the veneration of local patron deities, had scant doctrine or moral instruction. Those duties fell to philosophers. The popular religions emphasized public celebrations, in which everyone was expected to participate. Everyone came together to honor the emperor and swear by his genius, or to pay homage to the city’s patron gods. This promoted social unity and (allegedly) maintained the favor of the gods. Imagine mandatory celebrations of Independence Day as a proof of loyalty to nation and neighbor, and we start to see polytheism and emperor worship as Greco-Romans did. Peter calls all of it “lawless idolatry” (1 Peter 4:3 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>), since these gods had no laws of their own and violated the law of God.</p>
        <p>The vices of Peter’s day have parallels today. We spend enough time satisfying our greed and lusts, getting drunk or stoned, and following newer deities. Peter exhorts us that it’s time to change, to stop wasting our lives.</p>
        <p>Yet when people do change, it might displease old friends. They “are surprised when you do not join them in the same flood of debauchery, and they malign you” (1 Peter 4:4 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). Old friends notice that the believer no <span>longer (literally) “runs” or “travels with” them. The believer has a new crowd, and the old crowd doesn’t like it. It upsets the equilibrium. The woman who lives for her lusts feels threatened or judged by the woman who lives differently. The secular man is baffled. Why doesn’t his friend want to have fun? </span></p>
        <p>Change is unsettling, and that includes constructive moral reform. The secular person attacks. The church is still maligned for its moral positions. When a culture abandons biblical standards, when extramarital sex, cohabitation, and birth outside of marriage become normal, people attack the church for its moral snobbery and judgmentalism. While the church might deserve criticism if it constantly scolds, we surely invite reproach if we commit the very sins we condemn and if we blast one sin and tolerate another. Still, there is a time to stand up and say, “That’s wrong.” Peter warns us that if we do take a stand, we need to expect slander, not applause.</p>

        <h2>A Life Conducted in God’s Presence</h2>
        <p>Disciples might feel defenseless, but according to Peter, their foes “will have to give account to him who is ready to judge the living and the dead” (1 Peter 4:5). God is ready to judge all flesh. “The living and the dead” represent all humanity, past and present. If God is ready to judge, we should be ready, too, for “the end of all things is near” (4:7). James likewise says that “the Lord [is] coming,” that his coming is “near,” and that “the Judge is standing at the door” (James 5:8–9; cf. Rom. 13:12). This teaching originates with Jesus, who makes four essential points. First, no one knows the day or hour of his coming (Matt. 24:36, 42, 50). Second, he will come personally, in a manner that is visible to all (24:26–27, 30–31). Third, his coming ends the history of fallen humanity (24:37–40; 25:31–46). Fourth, we should always be prepared for Jesus’ return (24:42–25:13). If we are, we will have joy in his presence and will receive his blessing (25:14–46).<sup>11</sup></p>
        <p>Peter’s statement that “the end of all things is near” (1 Peter 4:7) is puzzling <span class="mini">if</span>we assume that <span class="mini">near</span> means “soon, by the clock.” But 2 Peter 3 explains that God’s scale of time differs from ours. For him, “a thousand years are like a day” (2 Peter 3:8). To the Lord, we might seem like little children who <span>start asking, “Are we there yet?” when a fifteen-hour trip is fifteen minutes old. Besides, an apparent delay grants sinners more time to repent (3:9). </span></p>
        <p>Jesus tells us that he will come suddenly, without warning, like a thief in the night (Matt. 24:43–44; cf. 2 Peter 3:10). As a thief slips in without forewarning, so Jesus will come unexpectedly (Matt. 24:50). Each day could be the day. Therefore, everyone should prepare for Jesus’ return. Scripture promotes the question “<span class="mini">Will you be ready</span> when he returns?” rather than “<span class="mini">When</span> will Christ return?” We should always be ready to give an account of our life.</p>
        <p>First Peter 4:6 has been the subject of extensive debate because of lexical, grammatical, and theological questions.<sup>12</sup> The great question is the meaning of the gospel proclamation to the dead. Some have cited 4:6 and 3:19 to support the concept of a postmortem gospel proclamation by which many, perhaps even all, humans eventually believe.<sup>13</sup> Others believe that the “dead” are the spiritually dead and that they will receive either judgment or life, depending on their response to the message. We can get a hint of some interpretive issues if we quote both the <span class="smallcaps">NIV</span> and <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>, noticing the differences:</p>
        <p class="blockquote">For this is the reason the gospel was preached even to those who are now dead, so that they might be judged according to men in regard to the body, but live according to God in regard to the spirit. (<span class="smallcaps">NIV</span>)</p>
        <p class="blockquote">For this is why the gospel was preached even to those who are dead, that though judged in the flesh the way people are, they might live in the spirit the way God does. (<span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>)</p>
        <p>As always, the literary and cultural contexts offer the surest path to understanding. The literary context shows that the “dead” are the physically dead. The previous verse, 1 Peter 4:5, has just mentioned “the living and the dead,” <span>where Peter certainly means the physically dead. It would be most surprising if he changed meanings so abruptly in tightly connected lines. The literary and cultural contexts also come together here. In the immediate context, Peter’s first point, as Karen Jobes notes, is that “death does not exempt a person from God’s coming judgment.” Pagans rarely taught personal accountability after death. </span></p>
        <p class="blockquote">With that assumption, a pagan critic could reasonably question what good the gospel is, since it seems so restrictive of behavior in this life, and then the believer dies like everyone else. Peter, however, teaches that <span class="mini">because</span>people will be judged even <span class="mini">after</span> physical death, contra pagan expectation, the gospel message of forgiveness and judgment . . . is still efficacious. Death does not invalidate either the promises or the warnings of the gospel of Jesus Christ.<sup>14</sup></p>
        <p>This preaching is therefore not connected to the preaching “to the spirits in prison,” mentioned in 1 Peter 3:19. Although English translations often use <span class="mini">preach</span> for both verses, the Greek of 3:19 is <span class="mini">kērussō</span>, which means that Jesus made a proclamation, while 1 Peter 4:6 uses <span class="mini">euaggelizomai</span>, which means that Jesus preached the good news.<sup>15</sup> Further, 3:19 says that <span class="mini">Christ</span> made a proclamation; 4:6 says that “the gospel was preached.” Acts and many of Paul’s epistles show that the apostles and their coworkers did this preaching.</p>
        <p>The point is straightforward and fits the context perfectly: The people who malign Christians (1 Peter 4:4) will have to give an account to God for their actions (4:5). First Peter 4:6 begins: “For this reason”—that is, because judgment is coming—the gospel was preached widely, “even to those who are now dead,” that is, people who have died since they heard the gospel while they still lived. Peter points out that the goal of evangelism is to prepare humans for the day when they stand before God and “give account” to him as Judge. Death exempts no one from this judgment, nor does death remove any believer from Jesus’ care.<sup>16</sup>His work as Deliverer is not always visible to us in this life, yet Jesus’ “redemption is not void . . . for his power extends to the dead.”<sup>17</sup></p>
        <p>This passage has several teachings that we must take to heart. Above all, it makes a claim about Christ. His gospel is essential for all and is no fleeting, provincial social construct. The people who mock it need it, lest they face the judgment with nothing but their sin. Everyone needs the gospel, and all who believe it “live according to God in regard to the spirit” (1 Peter 4:6).</p>
        <p>Everyone dies. Everyone is judged in the flesh, “according to men.” That is, everyone is guilty and everyone fails, even by human standards. We condemn others for sins that we know to be wrong, and then we do the same things, and so condemn ourselves (Rom. 2:1–3).<sup>18</sup></p>
        <p>The idea of judgment is offensive today. The Bible teaches that God is love; we reduce that to the idea that he is nice to people. C. S. Lewis observes that we want “not so much a Father in heaven as a grandfather in heaven—a senile benevolence who likes to see young people enjoying themselves and whose plan for the universe was simply that it might be . . . said at the end of each day ‘a good time was had by all.’ ”<sup>19</sup></p>
        <p>But God aims for something greater than our happiness; he aims for our goodness. No one wants to be condemned by God, but we should not want a God who is so soft that he doesn’t care what we do so long as we feel good while doing it. God is holy, a consuming fire. He deserves our reverence and awe. The thought of facing him and accounting for life in the body ought to motivate us to embrace the gospel, which was preached that men might live forever with God.</p>
        <p>This returns us to our first thought. We certainly may pursue individual goals for life, trying to find God’s design for us. Yet life is full of disruptions, and they easily erase the lines we wrote into the script. We can trust God to write new lines and let the story unfold as he wills. That begins with the substitutionary sacrifice of Christ, and then to his exemplary life that shows the way. It continues with Jesus’ resurrection and ascension. These grant us the boldness that lets us break with our old life. The world may slander, but it is more than enough compensation to share the attitude of the Lord who broke the power of sin on the cross, that we might break the power of sin day by day.</p>
        <div class="reference">
          <hr style="margin-top:1.5em"/>
          <p class="footnote">1. Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, <span class="mini">Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience</span> (New York: Harper & Row, 1990), 225–27.</p>
          <p class="footnote">2. Paul Theroux took this journey in 2001, as recounted in <span class="mini">Dark Star Safari: Overland from Cairo to Cape Town</span> (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2003).</p>
          <p class="footnote">3. Edmund Clowney, <span class="mini">The Message of 1 Peter: The Way of the Cross</span> (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1988), 15.</p>
          <p class="footnote">4. Hebrews concurs with Peter: “Let us fix our eyes on Jesus, the author and perfecter of our faith, who for the joy set before him endured the cross, scorning its shame, and sat down at the right hand of the throne of God” (Heb. 12:2).</p>
          <p class="footnote">5. <span class="mini">New International Dictionary of New Testament Theology</span>, s.v. “Reason” (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975), 3:125.</p>
          <p class="footnote">6. Scot McKnight, <span class="mini">1 Peter</span>, <span class="smallcaps">NIV</span> Application Commentary (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1996), 224.</p>
          <p class="footnote">7. Frederick W. Danker, ed., <span class="mini">A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament and Other Early Christian Literature</span>, 3rd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000), 638; Johannes Louw and Eugene Nida, <span class="mini">Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament: Based on Semantic Domains</span>, 2nd ed. (New York: United Bible Societies, 1998–99), 1:660. The Greek <span class="mini">pauō</span>, especially in the middle voice, means “to cease doing something” or to stop oneself; cf. Luke 11:1; Acts 14:18.</p>
          <p class="footnote">8. Robin Lane Fox, <span class="mini">Pagans and Christians</span> (New York: Knopf, 1987), 441.</p>
          <p class="footnote">9. Based on Nick Hornby, <span class="mini">How to Be Good</span> (New York: Viking, 2001).</p>
          <p class="footnote">10. Bruce W. Winter, <span class="mini">After Paul Left Corinth: The Influence of Secular Ethics and Social Change</span> (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2001).</p>
          <p class="footnote">11. This follows a summary of New Testament eschatology outlined in my commentary, <span class="mini">James</span>, Reformed Expository Commentary (Phillipsburg, NJ: P&R Publishing, 2007), 278–80</p>
          <p class="footnote">12. For more detailed exploration of the issues, consult any of the technical commentaries by Davids, Goppelt, Jobes, Marshall, and Michaels. While I have drawn on many writers, I most follow Karen H. Jobes, <span class="mini">1 Peter</span> (Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2005), 270–73.</p>
          <p class="footnote">13. See Hilarion Alfeyev, <span class="mini">Christ the Conqueror of Hell: The Descent into Hades from an Orthodox Perspective</span> (St. Vladimir’s Seminary Press, 2009). Alfeyev studies the history of the doctrine of Christ’s descent into hell. In the East, he found widespread belief that Jesus preached, postmortem, to those who did not believe in him during their lifetime. The West generally held a narrower view—perhaps applying Jesus’ preaching to Noah’s generation. Many in the East held that Jesus “freed all who were held captive” and “emptied hell” so that no mortals remained. Thus, Jesus descended into hell not as victim but as Conqueror, to mortify death and destroy hell. See ibid., 203–18.</p>
          <p class="footnote">14. Jobes, <span class="mini">1 Peter</span>, 270–71.</p>
          <p class="footnote">15. As we noted in the previous chapter, <span class="mini">kērussō</span> and <span class="mini">euaggelizomai</span> inevitably overlap in meaning, but a distinction remains.</p>
          <p class="footnote">16. Jobes, <span class="mini">1 Peter</span>, 272–73.</p>
          <p class="footnote">17. John Calvin, <span class="mini">Calvin’s Commentaries</span>, trans. John Owen, vol. 22, <span class="mini">The First Epistle of Peter</span> (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1999), 126</p>
          <p class="footnote">18. J. Ramsey Michaels, <span class="mini">1 Peter</span>, Word Biblical Commentary 49 (Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 1988), 154–55.</p>
          <p class="footnote">19. C. S. Lewis, <span class="mini">The Problem of Pain</span> (New York: Collins Fount Paperbacks, 1977), 28.</p>
        </div>

    </section>
  </body>
</html>
