<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
  <head>
    <title>Reformed Expository Commentary: 1 Peter</title>
    <link href="../styles/mywsb-dev.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  </head>
  <body epub:type="bodymatter">
    <section epub:type="chapter">

        <h1>2. A Sure and Living Hope</h1>
        <p class="center" style="font-family:NuptialScript;font-size:2em;margin-bottom:2em">1 Peter 1:3–9</p>
        <p class="center" style="margin:0 3em 3em 3em"><span class="mini">Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ! In his great mercy he has given us new birth into a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead</span>. (1 Peter 1:3)</p>
        <p style="text-indent:0"><span class="dcap bgcolor">I</span> once wrote a short story and everyone seemed to like it, but I have no contacts in fiction, so I have <span class="mini">faint hope</span> that it will ever be published. I have <span class="mini">a middling hope</span> of visiting Hawaii someday. I would like to hike its isolated trails, yet it seems far away, commercialized, and expensive. But if I say I <span class="mini">hope</span> my wife will always love me, I mean something quite different. That hope is strong and personal, and a great deal rests on it. Even if I shiver at the weight of saying, “I hope she <span class="mini">always</span> loves me,” I am not troubled with doubts, because I know her.</p>
        <p>In a similar vein, Peter begins with a strong and personal hope. It rests on the God he knows. His hope rests in God’s election (1 Peter 1:1), God’s foreknowledge (1:2), and God’s power (1:5). Peter also names Jesus Christ five times in his first seven verses. He tells us to praise Jesus and obey him (1:2–3). Our hope is “living,” that is, imperishable and undying (cf. Rom. 6:9). It depends on Jesus’ blood (1 Peter 1:2), Jesus’ resurrection (1:3), and Jesus’ second appearance (1:7).</p>
        <p>After he describes God’s character and work, Peter moves swiftly to blessing and praise. “Blessed be God” was a common phrase in Jewish devotion, but Peter’s focus on Jesus makes it a Christian blessing (see 1 Peter 1:3 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). Peter gives us several reasons to bless God. We were <span class="mini">chosen</span> by God the Father, <span class="mini">sanctified</span> by God the Spirit, and <span class="mini">sprinkled clean</span> by the blood of Jesus, the Son. Because of the triune God’s work, Peter can tell us, “May grace and peace be multiplied to you” (1:2 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). Peter knows that God has blessed his people, but he also says that God is blessed—and, he hints, we may bless him, too, as we see the present hope and future inheritance that God has granted us (1:3–5)</p>
        <p>This hope was essential, since Peter’s churches, scattered through the region now called Asia Minor, suffered all kinds of trials (1 Peter 1:6). These fiery trials tested and refined their faith, but also provoked fear (3:14; 4:12). Peter assures his people that God’s power will shield them. They will pass these tests, prove their faith genuine, and gain honor when their salvation is complete (1:7–9).</p>

        <h2>Blessed Be Our Lord God</h2>
        <p>The <span class="smallcaps">NIV</span> translates Peter’s first words as “Praise” be to God (1 Peter 1:3a), while the <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span> says “Blessed” be God. It is easy to defend both choices. The word that Peter uses, <span class="mini">eulogētos</span>, means “blessed.” Yet Peter does not bless God in the way that God blesses us. God <span class="mini">gives us</span> his blessing, but we <span class="mini">declare</span> that God is the Blessed One. Full of knowledge and strength (1:2, 5), he gives us grace, mercy, and life (1:2–3). When we say these things, we <span class="mini">praise</span> God. God doesn’t <span class="mini">need</span> our blessing, so in one sense we cannot bless him. As Hebrews 7:7 notes, the greater blesses the lesser. God doesn’t need to hear nice words in order to feel better about himself or to stay motivated to do good. Rather, it is good <span class="mini">for us</span> to declare God’s excellence.</p>
        <p>In verse 3, Peter cites Jesus’ full title, “our Lord Jesus Christ,” which appears about thirty-five times in eleven different books of the New Testament.1Working backward, Christ means that he is the promised Messiah. Jesus means that he is Savior; in Hebrew, Joshua/Jesus means “Yahweh saves.” Lord means that he rules all things. Beyond all that, he is ours, and we are his. So he is the Lord and our Lord. He is God’s Anointed, and Yahweh saves through him.</p>

        <h2>Our Hope and Inheritance</h2>
        <p>Peter’s praise mentions both the quality and the certainty of God’s salvation: “In his great mercy he has given us new birth into a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, and into an inheritance that can never perish, spoil or fade” (1 Peter 1:3b–4a). The opening verses of Peter are steeped in covenantal language. Peter has already said that God elects and has foreknowledge of his people. His <span class="mini">mercy</span> (<span class="mini">hesed</span> in the Old Testament, <span class="mini">eleos</span> in the <span class="smallcaps">LXX</span><sup>2</sup> and New Testament) is closely linked to God’s covenant name and covenant-making deeds. He shows mercy (<span class="mini">hesed</span> is also translated “steadfast love”) to thousands who love him (Ex. 20:6; Deut. 5:10). When he reveals himself to Moses, he says that he is “the compassionate and gracious God, slow to anger, abounding in love [<span class="mini">hesed</span>] and faithfulness” (Ex. 34:6). In his mercy, Peter continues, “he has given us new birth” (1 Peter 1:3). “Give new birth” translates one Greek verb (<span class="mini">anagennaō</span>) that appears only in 1 Peter. The term echoes Jesus’ teaching of Nicodemus, Israel’s teacher, that he had to be born anew and born of the Spirit if he hoped to see God’s kingdom (John 3:1–10). Nicodemus and Peter, Jews and Gentiles, you and I—all need God’s Spirit to breathe life into our dead souls. Pastors need to believe this, and to say it, to move believers to gratitude and to move unbelievers to humble themselves and receive this rebirth.</p>
        <p>In his mercy, God has given us three things: a living hope (1 Peter 1:3), an inheritance (1:4), and salvation (1:5). All three follow our new birth. Our hope rests not in teachings, nor even in a teacher, but in the Redeemer who rose from the dead.</p>
        <p>Through his death, Jesus bore our sins (1 Peter 2:24), and through his resurrection, we obtain “an inheritance that is imperishable, undefiled, and unfading, kept in heaven for you” (1:4 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). The resurrection of Jesus gives us hope because it proves that death is not the last word. Death could not hold him (Acts 2:24), and it cannot hold us if we are united to him by faith (Rom. 5:21–6:9). An inheritance is a <span class="mini">gift</span>based on a relationship, not <span>a wage for a performance. Because the gift rests on the Father’s grace and covenant, and because God keeps <span class="mini">us</span> safe, our inheritance is safe. In language that is almost poetic in the original, Peter says that this inheritance is “imperishable, undefiled, and unfading.” Nothing can spoil our inheritance. It is “untouched by death, unstained by evil, unimpaired by time; it is compounded of immortality, purity and beauty.”<sup>3</sup> Nothing can jeopardize it and nothing can ruin it.<sup>4</sup> </span></p>
        <p>Nothing can keep this inheritance from us, and, Peter declares, nothing can keep us from it. Our inheritance is “kept in heaven for you, who by God’s power are being guarded through faith for a salvation ready to be revealed in the last time” (1 Peter 1:4b–5 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). The symmetry is perfect. God keeps the inheritance for us, and he keeps us for the inheritance. He keeps the treasure for us, <span class="mini">and</span>he guards us so that we will properly enjoy it.<sup>5</sup></p>
        <p>Suppose someone’s fortieth birthday is at hand. Family and friends plan a surprise party. The celebrants have everything ready at the chosen venue. But if it is a surprise, someone has to deliver the birthday girl to the appointed place at the ordained time. Peter says that God plays both roles in this vignette. He prepares the perfect party <span class="mini">and</span> he brings us to the party. Philippians promises that God “who began a good work in you will carry it on to completion until the day of Christ Jesus” (Phil. 1:6).</p>
        <p>The Westminster Confession perhaps offers the finest description of the assurance that believers should have that the Lord will grant them eternal life in chapter 17, “Of the Perseverance of the Saints”:</p>
        <p class="blockquote">17.1. They, whom God has accepted in His Beloved, effectually called, and sanctified by His Spirit, can neither totally nor finally fall away from the state of grace, but shall certainly persevere therein to the end, and be eternally saved.</p>
        <p class="blockquote">17.2. This perseverance of the saints depends not upon their own free will, but upon the immutability of the decree of election, flowing from the free <span>and unchangeable love of God the Father; upon the efficacy of the merit and intercession of Jesus Christ, the abiding of the Spirit, and of the seed of God within them; and the nature of the covenant of grace: from all which arises also the certainty and infallibility thereof. </span></p>
        <p>Peter teaches that God keeps both us and the inheritance until salvation is “ready to be revealed in the last time” (1 Peter 1:5). Although he knows there is more, Paul typically stresses that the “mystery” of salvation has <span class="mini">already been revealed</span> (e.g., Eph. 3:8–12; Col. 1:25–27). Peter stresses that there is <span class="mini">more to be revealed</span> (1 Peter 1:5, 7). Both are true. Similarly, John calls our attention to eternal life as a present possession (John 3:36; 4:36; 5:24; etc.), while Peter tells us that eternal life is coming. Again, both are true and necessary perspectives. Life is here, but there is much more to come</p>

        <h2>Joy in Suffering</h2>
        <p>At that moment, the Christians of Asia Minor were suffering grief, but Peter teaches that the prospect of an inheritance, secured by God, still brings joy. We can celebrate because we know that the salvation that is already ours will one day be revealed in full: “In this you greatly rejoice, though now for a little while you may have had to suffer grief in all kinds of trials” (1 Peter 1:6). This suffering is brief—“for a little while”—from the perspective of eternity, even if pain can seem to last forever when we are immersed in it.</p>
        <p>Peter says that his people “had to suffer.” He says this because suffering is a logical result of conversion. It is “the wake following behind salvation’s boat.”<sup>6</sup> It was predictable because following God entails abandoning “the gods” whose worship was part of the glue that united Roman society. It was foreseeable because Christian morality clashed with pagan morality.</p>
        <p>Peter doesn’t quite say that suffering is inevitable, but he says that it is no surprise (1 Peter 4:12). In the quasi-Christianized societies of the West, when belief in one God is common and Christian ethics have some influence on social ethics, suffering is not certain. But in most places and times, Christian beliefs and practices are exceptional, not normal. If we tell the world that its ideas are false and its practices dangerous, as we must, the world will not be pleased, and that displeasure readily leads to opposition.</p>
        <p>If, while living in a non-Christian culture, we face no opposition, we are probably too interested in fitting in and getting along. When worldviews clash, we don’t have the right to sit in silence. When we push against a misguided world, the world will push back, hard. We should expect it and rejoice in it, as Jesus says:</p>
        <p class="blockquote">Blessed are those who are persecuted because of righteousness, <br/><span style="margin-left:1.25em"/>for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.</p>
        <p class="blockquote">Blessed are you when people insult you, persecute you and falsely say all kinds of evil against you because of me. Rejoice . . . , because great is your reward in heaven, for in the same way they persecuted the prophets who were before you. (Matt. 5:10–12)</p>
        <p>Peter describes our trials in five ways in 1 Peter 1:6–7. First, when compared to eternity, they are brief in duration; they last “a little while.” Second, they are varied in form; there are “all kinds.” Third, they have a kind of necessity; “you . . . had to suffer.” Fourth, suffering proves that our faith is real; “these have come so that your faith—of greater worth than gold, which perishes even though refined by fire—may be proved genuine” (1:7a). Fifth, suffering will “result in praise, glory and honor when Jesus Christ is revealed” (1:7b). Because suffering has a limit and a purpose, we can still rejoice in it.</p>
        <p>Peter’s comment about gold is a parenthesis that explains how trials “prove” our faith. First, gold and faith are both proved by fire. Literal fire tests gold, and the metaphorical fire of adversity tests men and their faith (see Ps. 66:10; Prov. 17:3; James 1:2–4; etc.).<sup>7</sup> “Just as men used fire to distinguish true gold from counterfeit [and alloyed or imperfect metals], so God uses trials to distinguish genuine faith from superficial profession.”<sup>8</sup> Second, while gold was the most precious metal to the ancients, faith has greater value. Like every other created thing, gold is perishable (1 Peter 1:7, 18), but our faith is imperishable, since God preserves us in it (1:5).</p>
        <p>Peter’s teaching about suffering questions us. Do you see it as he does? Or do you withdraw and complain that life is unfair? There <span class="mini">is</span> a time to flee persecution: when no one is listening, when the opposition or abuse is unrelenting, when there is important work to do elsewhere, and (most important) when we have no obligations or vows <span class="mini">so that we are free to leave</span> (see Matthew 10:23 in context). But on most occasions, we are not free to leave. In that case, do we do all we can to avoid pain, or do we endure, knowing that our willingness to endure proves that our faith is real?</p>
        <p>When our relationships are deeper, our minds sharper, our bodies stronger, our self-discipline stiffer, our emotions healthier, and our contributions well received, it is easy to give thanks. But if you suffer trials, take heart; God is guarding your inheritance.<sup>9</sup> Many trials come from the outside, when people wrong us or when disease and disaster wound us. Other trials come from within—self-doubt, irrational fear, loss of passion. Trials are fiery, and we should never pretend otherwise. They hurt, sometimes so badly that despair assails us. But Peter encourages us that we can rejoice as trials prove our faith real. All things lead to praise when Jesus is revealed and completes his salvation. That coming salvation transforms our present experience, offering us hope even in the worst of times.</p>
        <p>These claims can sound like religious jargon, but anyone who has immersed himself in life long enough has tasted the bitter pains that life hurls at humans. Again, it can sound like rhetoric, but it was not rhetoric for Peter. He walked with Jesus and suffered arrest and threats for the crime of telling the truth about him. To be sure, we can deceive others and deceive ourselves with vapid talk of joy, but it is good and right to have peace at 3 A.M. when troubles interrupt our sleep.</p>
        <p>When we persevere and our faith is proved, the result is “praise, glory and honor when Jesus Christ is revealed” (1 Peter 1:7b). This praise could be God’s, since he always merits praise, even for completing his redemption. Or it could be the praise that God bestows on the faithful on judgment day (Matt. 25:19–23; Rom. 2:29). Since Peter has his eye on the coming of salvation and the revelation of Christ “in the last time,” it seems that Peter means the praise God confers to us, for our faith and justice in this age.</p>

        <h2>Jesus, the Object of Our Faith and Source of Our Blessing</h2>
        <p>First Peter 1:3–9 is one complex sentence with each part connecting to the one before. In the Greek text, Peter links verses 7 and 8 with the relative pronoun <span class="mini">whom</span>, referring to Jesus. It works this way: Peter mentions Jesus’ future coming at the end of 1:7 and then turns to his current absence in 1:8. Peter addresses “the discrepancy between [the] present experience of suffering and [the] anticipated future glory.”<sup>10</sup> Peter saw Jesus with his own eyes and touched him with his hands, but his people have not done so and will not do so until the day that Jesus is revealed. Peter states, “Though <span class="mini">you have not seen him</span>, you love him; and <span class="mini">even though you do not see him now</span>, you believe in him and are filled with an inexpressible and glorious joy” (1:8).<sup>11</sup> No passage better explains the challenge of believing in Jesus without seeing him than the account of Thomas and the risen Christ in John 20. Late on the day of his resurrection, Jesus appeared to his disciples, minus Judas, who had killed himself, and minus Thomas, who was away for unstated reasons. The ten were so glad to see Jesus, and when Thomas rejoined them, they told him, “We have seen the Lord!” (20:25). Thomas refused to believe them and swore, “Unless I see in his hands the mark of the nails, and place my finger into the mark of the nails, and place my hand into his side, I will never believe” (20:25b <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>).</p>
        <p>A week later, Jesus appeared to the disciples again, and this time Thomas was present. In essence, Jesus told Thomas something like this: “I’ve been listening. Your brash skepticism stands on the cusp of unbelief, but I know you and will yield to your foolish demand.” So then Jesus said, “Put your finger here, and see my hands; and put out your hand, and place it in my side. Do not disbelieve, but believe” (John 20:27 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>).</p>
        <p>John doesn’t mention whether Thomas took up the invitation to touch his wounds or not, but Thomas certainly saw Jesus. It was all he needed, and the braggadocio of unbelief melted away. He repented and confessed, “My Lord and my God!” (John 20:28). Important as Jesus’ encounter with <span> Thomas was, John’s account looks past Thomas himself and sees the generations coming after him. Knowing that future disciples would not see his flesh, as Thomas had, Jesus told Thomas, “Because you have seen me, you have believed; blessed are those who have not seen and yet have believed” (20:29). </span></p>
        <p>So Jesus looked past Thomas and saw <span class="mini">us</span>. He envisioned the day when all who believe must do so without the evidence that Thomas enjoyed. The skeptical member of later generations has roughly the position that Thomas had in John 20:25. He had <span class="mini">heard</span> that Jesus was alive, but had not <span class="mini">seen</span> him. Jesus calls Thomas a poor guide for those who have not seen. Thomas had enough reason to believe. He had the testimony of his trusted friends, yet he refused it. The Lord graciously granted Thomas the evidence that he wrongly demanded. Still, the Lord corrected him when he said, “Blessed are those who have not seen and yet have believed” (20:29 <span class="smallcaps">ESV</span>). Jesus speaks this blessing to us, as we trust the testimony of the apostles, yield to the Spirit’s persuasion, and believe.</p>
        <p>As we believe, Peter concludes, we “are filled with an inexpressible and glorious joy” (1 Peter 1:8b). As Alan Stibbs observes, “Peter’s readers had not seen Jesus during His earthly life, as Peter himself had done, yet they were giving Him the responsive love of their hearts in living fellowship.”<sup>12</sup> Because this joy has its origin in God, not man, it is “inexpressible,” that is, it defies perfect human expression.</p>
        <p>This joy rests on confidence in God’s continuing direction, Peter explains, “for you are receiving the goal of your faith, the salvation of your souls” (1 Peter 1:9). The translation “souls” could mislead us. On most occasions, the Greek word <span class="mini">psuchē</span>could just as easily be translated “life.” The definitive Greek-English lexicon offers three definitions for <span class="mini">psuchē</span>. First, it is “life on earth in its animating aspect”; second, it is the “seat and center of the inner human life”; and third, it is “an entity with personhood.”<sup>13</sup> In other words, the soul stands for the whole person, not the spirit or reason in contrast to the body. In Scripture, a human is a psychosomatic unity. The goal of redemption is not the liberation of the disembodied soul from this wretched life, as Greeks thought. It is a new creation, which the whole <span>person enjoys forever, with both a new spirit and a new body, one much like the resurrection body of Jesus. </span></p>
        <p>When I was in third and fourth grades, I attended a Sunday school class that made me think I didn’t want to be a Christian. I heard that if I believed in God, I could go to heaven when I died and be like an angel, sitting on a cloud, playing a harp, and singing all day. I knew I wasn’t supposed to think this way, but I wanted no part of my teacher’s cloud-harp heaven. What boy would? What man or woman should? The gospel story says more than “Jesus is alive.” It says that Jesus is alive in flesh and blood, chewing fish, shaking hands, slapping backs, and looking better than ever! His resurrection body is a foretaste of our resurrected bodies, which we will enjoy as embodied spirits, living in a renewed, sin-free creation. Peter does not say that we will go up to heaven, but that we have started to receive and will one day fully receive comprehensive salvation. That promise gives us hope and joy in affliction.</p>
        <p>The first sentences of 1 Peter introduce us to his essential themes. Christians are God’s elect, yet strangers in the world. Because we are outsiders, Peter knows we will face trouble. Indeed, the only way to avoid trouble is to live as pagans do, or to hide our lifestyle, or to eviscerate our message so that it ceases to offend. In other words, the way to live without trouble is to remove our nerves and spine. That might be a sad thought, since our culture is our home. We care about it and at least hope to make it a better place. But there are limits. So many of the values of our age stand opposed to God’s truth. Still, it can grieve us when we realize that we will never exactly fit in our world.</p>
        <p>Peter counters this sobering reality with God’s promises and a call to claim them. Through Christ we have life, and no force from without or within can destroy it. Even when we face trials, we take heart because they demonstrate that our allegiance to God is genuine, especially when we persevere through them.</p>
        <p>It is interesting that Peter mentions the cardinal Christian virtues in our passage. He says that our new birth gives us a living <span class="mini">hope</span> (1 Peter 1:3), that we receive God’s protection through <span class="mini">faith</span> (1:5), and that we <span class="mini">love</span> Jesus even if we have never seen him (1:8). Still, as important as our hope, love, and faith may be, our attention stays with Jesus. He has conquered death, he protects us, and nothing can rob us of joy now or keep us from sharing his glory when he returns.</p>
        <div class="reference">
          <hr style="margin-top:1.5em"/>
          <p class="footnote">1. There is some doubt about the numbers because of variant readings in the original text.</p>
          <p class="footnote">2. The Septuagint (<span class="smallcaps">LXX</span>) is the oldest translation of the Hebrew Old Testament in Greek. It was completed around 100 B.C.</p>
          <p class="footnote">3. F. W. Beare, <span class="mini">The First Epistle of Peter</span>, 3rd ed. (Oxford: Blackwell, 1970), 83–84.</p>
          <p class="footnote">4. <span class="mini">Inheritance</span> is a common concept in Scripture. Believers can inherit the kingdom, the promise, the land, the earth, and salvation. An inheritance is a settled and sanctioned possession, whether it comes from family or from God. See J. Ramsey Michaels, <span class="mini">1 Peter</span>, Word Biblical Commentary 49 (Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 1988), 20–21.</p>
          <p class="footnote">5. The Greek verbs are different. The first, <span class="mini">tēreō</span>, means “to keep” or “guard.” The second, <span class="mini">phroureō</span>, means “to guard” or “watch over.” Clearly, their meanings are close.</p>
          <p class="footnote">6. Scot McKnight, <span class="mini">1 Peter</span>, <span class="smallcaps">NIV</span> Application Commentary (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1996), 74.</p>
          <p class="footnote">7. Writing around Peter’s time, Seneca said, “Fire tests gold, affliction tests strong men” in his work <span class="mini">Epistles on Providence</span>, 5.10. Ecclesiasticus, a widely read collection of intertestamental Jewish wisdom, said, “Gold is tested in the fire, and those found acceptable [to God], in the furnace of humiliation” (Ecclus. 2:5 <span class="smallcaps">NRSV</span>).</p>
          <p class="footnote">8. Alan M. Stibbs, <span class="mini">The First Epistle General of Peter</span> (London: Tyndale, 1959), 78.</p>
          <p class="footnote">9. The grammatically attentive reader will notice that this section, like others, shifts from first-person <span class="mini">we</span>-language to second-person <span class="mini">you</span>-language. Peter normally speaks in the second person, but he shifts to the first-person plural in 1 Peter 1:3; 2:24; 4:17.</p>
          <p class="footnote">10. Paul J. Achtemeier, <span class="mini">1 Peter</span> (Minneapolis: Fortress, 1996), 102.</p>
          <p class="footnote">11. The two finite verbs, translated “love” and “are filled with . . . joy,” could be either indicatives or imperatives, since the forms are identical in the present, second-person plural, but it is best to take them as indicatives, since Peter is still describing his people’s situation. Commands begin in 1 Peter 1:13.</p>
          <p class="footnote">12. Stibbs, <span class="mini">First Epistle General of Peter</span>, 79.</p>
          <p class="footnote">13. Frederick W. Danker, ed., <span class="mini">A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament and Other Early Christian Literature</span>, 3rd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000), 1098–99.</p>
        </div>

    </section>
  </body>
</html>
